[1]. Power System Voltage Stability
At any point of time, a power system operating condition should be stable, meeting various operational
criteria, and it should also be secure in the event of any credible contingency. Present day power
systems are being operated closer to their stability limits due to economic and environmental
constraints. Maintaining a stable and secure operation of a power system is therefore a very important
and challenging issue. Voltage instability has been given much attention by power system researchers
and planners in recent years, and is being regarded as one of the major sources of power system
insecurity. Voltage instability phenomena are the ones in which the receiving end voltage decreases well
below its normal value and does not come back even after setting restoring mechanisms such as VAR
compensators, or continues to oscillate for lack of damping against the disturbances. Voltage collapse is
the process by which the voltage falls to a low, unacceptable value as a result of an avalanche of events
accompanying voltage instability [1]. Once associated with weak systems and long lines, voltage
problems are now also a source of concern in highly developed networks as a result of heavier loading.
 
The main factors causing voltage instability in a power system are now well explored and
understood [1-13]. A brief introduction to the basic concepts of voltage stability and some of the
conventional methods of voltage stability analysis are presented in this chapter. Simulation results on
test power systems are presented to illustrate the problem of voltage stability and the conventional
methods to analyze the problem. Limitations of conventional methods of voltage stability analysis are
pointed out and the scope of the use of Artificial Neural Networks as a better alternative is discussed.

[2]. Classification of voltage stability
The time span of a disturbance in a power system, causing a potential voltage instability problem, can be
classified into short-term and long-term. The corresponding voltage stability dynamics is called shortterm and long-term dynamics respectively [2-5]. Automatic voltage regulators, excitation systems,
turbine and governor dynamics fall in this short-term or ‘transient’ time scale, which is typically a few
seconds. Induction motors, electronically operated loads and HVDC interconnections also fall in this
category. If the system is stable, short-term disturbance dies out and the system enters a slow long-term
dynamics. Components operating in the long-term time frame are transformer tap changers, limiters,
boilers etc. Typically, this time frame is for a few minutes to tens of minutes. A voltage stability problem
in the long-term time frame is mainly due to the large electrical distance between the generator and the
load, and thus depends on the detailed topology of the power system.
 
Figure 1.1 shows the components and controls that may affect the voltage stability of a power
system, along with their time frame of operation [1]. Examples of short-term or transient voltage
instability can be found in the instability caused by rotor angle imbalance or loss of synchronism. Recent
studies have shown that the integration of highly stressed HVDC links degrades the transient voltage
stability of the system [1]. 

There is not much scope for operator intervention in transient voltage instability. The transmission
system operator (TSO) mainly relies on automatic emergency actions to avoid incumbent voltage
instability. The automatic corrective actions are taken through protective devices to preserve operation
of largest possible part of the power system by isolating the unstable part [6].

Long-term voltage instability (or mid-term or post-transient, as it is sometimes called) problems
can occur in heavily loaded systems where the electrical distance is large between the generator and the
load. The instability may be triggered by high power imports from remote generating stations, a sudden
large disturbance, or a large load buildup (such as morning or afternoon pickup). Operator intervention
may be possible if the time scale is long enough. Timely application of reactive power compensation or
load shedding may prevent this type of voltage instability.

From the point of view of techniques used to analyze the voltage stability, it is often useful to
categorize the problem into small-disturbance and large-disturbance voltage stability [2]. Small
disturbance or steady state voltage stability deals with the situation when the system is subjected to a
small perturbation, such that the system can be analyzed by linearizing around the pre-disturbance
operating point. Steady state stability analysis is helpful in getting a qualitative picture of the system,
i.e., how stressed the system is, or how close the system is, to the point of instability. Examples of
steady state stability can be found in power systems experiencing gradual change in load.

Large-disturbance stability deals with larger disturbances such as loss of generation, loss of line
etc. To analyze the large-disturbance stability, one has to capture the system dynamics for the whole
time frame of the disturbance. A suitable model of the system has to be assumed and a detailed
dynamic analysis has to be carried out in order to get a clear picture of the stability.

[3]. Voltage stability of a simple 2-bus system
The basic concept of voltage stability can be explained with a simple 2-bus system shown in Figure 1.2.
The load is of constant power type. Real power transfer from bus 1 to 2 is given by
P = (EV / X) sin(δ)
Reactive power transfer from bus 1 to 2 is given by,
Q = -(V^2 / X)+((EV/X)cosδ)
where, E = E∠δ is the voltage at bus 1,
V = V∠0 is the voltage at bus 2,
X= impedance of the line (neglecting resistance),
δ = power angle.

Normalizing the terms in (1.1) and (1.2) with v = V/E , p = P.X/E^2
and q = Q.X/E^2, one obtains,
p = v sin δ
q = - v^2
q = -v^2 + v cos δ
Squaring the two equations above and rearranging,
v^2(sin^2 δ + cos^2 δ) = p^2 +(q + v^2)^2
or, v^4 + v^2 (2q - 1) + (p^2 + q^2) = 0
Positive real solutions of v from (1.5) are given by
v = √[(1/2 - q ± √(1/4 - p² - q))/2]

A plot of v on the p-q-v plane is shown in Figure 1.3 [4]. Corresponding to each point (p,q), there are two
solutions for voltage, one is the high voltage or stable solution, which is the actual voltage at the bus,
and the other one is the low voltage or unstable solution. The equator, along which the two solutions of
v are equal, represents maximum power points. Starting from any operating point on the upper part of
the surface, an increase in p or q or both brings the system closer to the maximum power point. An
increase in p or q beyond the maximum power point makes the voltage unstable. 

The preceding discussion illustrates voltage instability caused by an increase in system loading.
In a real power system, voltage instability is caused by a combination of many additional factors which
includes the transmission capability of the network, generator reactive power and voltage control limits,
voltage sensitivity of the load, characteristics of reactive compensation devices, action of voltage control
devices such as transformer under load tap changers (ULTCs) etc.

[4]. Tools for voltage stability analysis
Different methods exist in the literature for carrying out a steady state voltage stability analysis. The
conventional methods can be broadly classified into the following types.
1. P-V curve method.
2. V-Q curve method and reactive power reserve.
3. Methods based on singularity of power flow Jacobian matrix at the point of voltage
collapse.
4. Continuation power flow method.

[4.1] P-V curve method
This is one of the widely used methods of voltage stability analysis. This gives the available amount of
active power margin before the point of voltage instability. For radial systems, the voltage of the critical
bus is monitored against the changes in real power consumption. For large meshed networks, P can be
the total active load in the load area and V can be the voltage of the critical or representative bus. Real
power transfer through a transmission interface or interconnection also can be studied by this method.

For a simple two-bus system as shown in Figure 1.2, equation (1.6) gives real solutions of v^2,
provided (1 – 4q – 4p^2) ≥ 0.
Assuming a constant power factor load such that q/p = k (constant), the inequality
p ≤ 1/2 ((1 + k²)^1/2 - k)
For values of 'p' satisfying (1.7), there are two solutions of v as follows:
v₁ = (1/2 - pk + (1/4 - pk - p²)^1/2)^1/2
and     v₂ = (1/2 - pk - (1/4 - pk - p²)^1/2)^1/2
For real values of v₁ and v₂, the terms under the square roots should be positive.
Hence,      (1/2 - pk - (1/4 - pk - p²)^1/2) ≥ 0
or,         p²(k² + 1) ≥ 0
which is always true.

Hence (1.7) is the inequality that determines the maximum value of p.
Thus, representing the load as a constant power factor type, with a suitably chosen power
factor, the active power margin can be computed from (1.7). For different values of load power factors,
i.e., for different corresponding values of ‘k’, the normalized values of load active power are shown in
Figure 1.4. 

In practice, it is possible to find the Thevenin equivalent of any system with respect to the bus
under consideration. It is to be noted that the generations are rescheduled at each step of change of the
load. Some of the generators may hit the reactive power limit. The network topology may keep changing
with respect to the critical bus, with change in the loading, thereby reducing the accuracy of the
method. This method works well in the case of an infinite bus and isolated load scenario. 

[5]. Detailed voltage stability analysis of the 10-bus test system for
different loading conditions
Voltage stability analysis is carried out for the 10-bus test system described earlier in this chapter.
Different transformer tap settings for different load levels and corresponding generations for the 10-bus
test system are given in Tables 1.7 to 1.9 [2, 17]. Simulations are carried out with and without load tap
changers (LTCs) between bus 4 and bus 10. The effect of line outage on voltage stability is also studied. 

Simulations are done in PowerWorld Simulator [18]. Base case conditions for three load levels
are as follows.
• All the transformers are at fixed tap [Table 1.7].
• The load at bus 8 [Table 1.8] is of constant power type, while that of bus 4 is 50% constant
power and 50% constant current. 

Simulation results are recorded at four different operating conditions (or ‘snapshots’) at three different
load levels and are presented in Tables 1.10 to 1.12. The effect of LTC between bus 10 and 4 on voltages
at different busses, as well as the reactive power generation and consumption in nearby busses are
studied. 

At ‘snapshot 1’, i.e., when there is no line outage in the system and the LTC is kept at fixed tap
position, bus 4 voltage reduces with increased loading. At load level 3, the voltage level is very low and it
needs LTC operation to restore the voltage. 

When the LTC is turned on, there is a considerable increase in load bus (bus 4) voltage. With
higher voltage, load power consumption increases (because of 50% constant current load), which leads
to the reduction of voltages in the adjacent busses. At reduced voltage, output of the shunt capacitor
reduces, thereby stressing the generators to produce more reactive power. 

With outage of one line between bus 6 and bus 7, less power is available to the load from the
two generators at the other end of the system, thus the voltages reduce at the load end busses. Output
of the shunt capacitor falls because of reduced voltage and as a result load voltage deceases further.
Generators are more stressed and produce more reactive power to compensate for the loss.

Even with operation of LTC after line outage, load voltage is not restored significantly. A reason
for this is the shortage of available reactive power at the load end because of the line outage and
reduced efficiency of capacitors due to reduced voltage. In an attempt to raise the voltage, LTC
increases load power consumption. If the load is slightly increased, it can be seen that this reduces the
voltage further and eventually the system faces a voltage collapse. 

Modal analysis was carried out on the reduced Jacobian matrix of the system for different
operating conditions and the results are shown in Table 1.13. It can be seen that the minimum
eigenvalue of the reduced Jacobian matrix reduces with load. It can be used as an indicator of the
closeness of the operating point to the point of voltage collapse.