Power System Voltage Stability The EPRI Power System Engineering Series Dr.NealJ. Balu, Editor-in-Chief Kunpur + PowerSystem StabilityandControl Tayior + PowerSystem VoltageStability — 7 Voltage Stability Carson W. Taylor Fellow IEEE Principal, Carson TaylorSeminars PrincipalEngineer, Bonneville PowerAdministration Edited by Neal J. Balu Dominic Maratukulam Power System Planningand Operations Program Electrical Systems Division Electric Power Research Institute 3412 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto, California McGraw-Hill, Inc. NewYork SanFrancisco Washington, D.C. Auckland Bogota Caracas Lisbon London Madrid MexicoCity Milan Montreal NewDelhi SanJuan Singapore Sydney Tokyo Toronto POWER SYSTEMVOLTAGESTABILITY International Editions 1994 Exclusive rights by McGraw-Hill Book Co. - Singapore for manufacture and export. This bookcannotbere-exportedfromthecountrytowhich itisconsignedbyMcGraw-Hill. Copyright © 1994 by McGraw-Hill,Inc. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part ofthis publication may be reproduced or distributed inany formorbyanymeans,orstored inadatabaseorretrieval system, without thepriorwrittenpermission ofthepublisher. 23456BI7E P8MP 9987065 ThesponsoringeditorforthisbookwasHaroldB. Crawford, andthe production supervisorwasSuzanneBabeuf. LibraryofCongress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Taylor,CarsonW. Powersystem voltagestability /CarsonW.Taylor. P. cm, EPRIEditors, Neal J.BaluandDominicMaratukulam. Includesbibliographicalreferencesandindex. ISBN 0-07-063184-0 1. Electricpowersystem stability. I. Title. TK1005.T29 1994 621.319-de20 93-21455 CIP Information containedinthisworkhasbeenobtainedbyMcGraw-Hill, Inc., from sources believed to be reliable. However, neither McGraw- Hill norits authors guarantees the accuracy orcompleteness ofany information published herein,andneitherMcGraw-Hill noritsauthors shallberesponsible foranyerrors,omissions,ordamagesarisingoutof useofthisinformation.

Thiswork ispublishedwith theunderstanding that McGraw-Hill and its authors are supplying information, but are not attemptingto renderengineering or otherprofessional services. If suchservicesarerequired,theassistanceofanappropriate professional shouldbesought. Whenorderingthis title, useISBN0-07-113708-4 PrintedinSingapore = To myparents = Preface Power transmission capability has traditionally been limited by either rotor angle (synchronous) stability or by thermal loading capabilities. The blackout problem has been associated with transient stability; fortunately thisproblem is nowdiminishedbyfastshortcircuit clearing,powerful exci- tation systems, and various special stability controls. Voltage (load) stability, however, is now a major concern in planning and operating electric power systems. More and more electric utilities are facing voltage stability-imposed limits. Voltage instability and collapse have resulted in several majorsystem failures (blackouts) such as the mas- siveTokyo blackoutinJuly 1987. Voltage stability will remain a challenge for the foreseeable future and, indeed, is likely toincrease in importance. One reason is the need for more intensive use of available transmission facilities. The increased use of existing transmission is made possible, in part, by reactive power compensation—which is inherently less robust than “wire-in-the-air.” Over the last ten to fifteen years, and especially over about thelast five years, utility engineers, consultants, and university researchers have intensely studied voltage stability. Hundreds of technical papers have resulted, along with many conferences, symposiums, and seminars. Utili- ties have developed practical analysis techniques, and are now planning and operating power systems to prevent voltage instability forcredible dis- turbances. All relevant phenomena, includinglonger-term phenomena, can be demonstratedbytimedomain simulation.

While experts now have a good understanding ofvoltage phenomena, a comprehensive, practical explanation of voltage stability in book form is necessary. This is the firstbookon voltage stability. PowerSystem Voltage Stability is an outgrowth ofmany two-three day seminars which Ibegan offeringin 1988.Asafull-time engineerofthe Bon- neville PowerAdministration (BPA), the book is influenced by my work on voltage stability problems in thePacificNorthwest and adjacentareas. Itis Preface viii alsoinfluenced bymy participation in voltage stability work oftheWestern Systems Coordinating Council, North American Electric Reliability Coun- cil, IEEE, CIGRE, and EPRI. Although voltage stability is fairly well understood, there are many facets to the problem, rangingfrom generator controls totransmissionnet- work reactive power compensation to distribution network design to load characteristics. The physical characteristics and mathematical models ofa wide range ofequipment are important. PowerSystem Voltage Stability emphasizes the physical orengineering aspects ofvoltage stability, providing a conceptual understanding ofvolt- age stability. The simplest possiblemodels areused forconceptual explana- tions. Practical methods for computer analysis are emphasized. We aim to develop good intuition relative tovoltage problems, rather than to describe sophisticated mathematical analytical methods. The book is primarily for practicingengineers inpowersystem planningandoperation. However, the book should be useful to university students as a supplementary text. Uni- versity researchers may find the book provides necessary background material onthe voltage stability problem. Many references are provided forthosewho wish to delve deeper into a fascinatingsubject. The references are notexhaustive, however, andgener- ally represent recent publications which build on earlier work.

In keeping with the intended audience, most ofthe references are quite readable by thosewithoutadvanced mathematical training. Outline ofbook. The book is divided into nine chapters and six appendi- ces. Chapter 1 is introductory with emphasis on reactive power transmis- sion. Chapter 2 introduces the subject of voltage stability, providing definitions and basic concepts. Voltage stability is separated into transient andlonger-term phenomena. Chapters 3-5 describe equipment characteristics for transmission sys- tems, generation systems, and distribution/load systems. Modeling of equipment is emphasized. Chapters 6 and 7 describe computer simulation examples for both small equivalent power systems and for a very large power system. Both static and dynamic simulation methods are used. Both transient and long- er-term forms of voltage stability are studied using conventional and advanced computer programs. Chapter 8describesvoltage stability associatedwith HVDC links. Here the reactive powerdemand ofHVDC invertersis important. Chapter 9 provides planning and operating guidelines, and potential solutions to voltage problems. = ix Preface The appendices include description ofcomputer methods forpower flow and dynamic simulation, anddescription ofvoltage instability incidents. Voltage stability is still a fresh subject and many advances in under- standing, simulation software, and on-line security assessment software willbe made infutureyears. Infact, thebookwas frequently updateduntil the submission deadline. It’s likely thatarevised edition will be called for. I invite comments on the book and suggestions for revised editions. Please write to me at 252 Northwest Seblar Court, Portland, Oregon 97210. For those interested in desktop publishing, I used a Macintosh IIci computer and FrameMaker technical publishing software. I also used several other programs such as DeltaGraph and Canvas. The manuscript wassubmitted toMcGraw-Hill on diskettes. Acknowledgments.

I am indebted to many seminarparticipants, BPAcol- leagues, and industry colleagues. To a large extent, the book is a synthesis ofa large body ofliterature and practical knowledge. Through papers, cor- respondence, and discussions, Walter Lachs, Harrison Clark, Dr. Thierry Van Cutsem, Dr. Mrinal Pal, and others have provided many helpful insights. On an international level, I have been privileged to participate in the work oftwo CIGRE task forces investigating voltage stability. As part ofEPRI software development projects, discussions with Dr. Prabha Kun- durand colleagues atOntario Hydro were very important. Dr. Kundur and Mark Lauby reviewed the manuscript and provided many helpful suggestions. I, however, am solely responsible for the final version. The Electric Power Research Institute sponsored the book. I deeply appreciate the support at EPRI from Dr. Neal Balu, Mark Lauby, and Dominic Maratukulam. Although this was an off-hours project, I thank BPAengineering man- agement for encouraging advances in power system engineering, for pro- vidingthe opportunity to work on problems in the field ofvoltage stability, and for the privilege of participating in industry and professional society study ofvoltage stability. This work, however, is my own and does not nec- essarily reflect the views ofthe Bonneville PowerAdministration. Finally, I thank my wife, Gudrun Taylor, for herencouragement, proof- reading, and patience during many hours at the computer. Carson W. Taylor Portland, Oregon December 1992 Foreword Electric utilities have been forced in recent years to squeeze the maximum possible power through existing networks due to a variety oflimitations in the construction ofgeneration and transmission facilities. Voltage stability is concerned with the ability of a power system to maintain acceptable voltages at all nodes in the system under normal and contingent conditions.

A power system is said to have entereda state of voltage instability when adisturbance causes a progressive and uncontrol- lable decline in voltage. Inadequate reactive power support from generators and transmission lines leads tovoltage instability orvoltage collapse, which have resulted in several major system failures in recent years. Hence, a thorough under- standing ofvoltage stability phenomena and designing mitigation schemes to prevent voltage instability isofgreatvalue to utilities. The author, Carson Taylor, is an internationally recognized expert on power system voltage stability. He not only has a thorough understanding ofthe fundamental concepts ofvoltage stability but also has demonstrated his skill in developing practical solutions to real life problems of voltage instability. Carson has taught many courses and written numerous techni- cal papers on the subjectofpower system voltage stability. It gives me great pleasure to write the Foreword for this timely book, which I am confident will beofgreat value to practicing engineers and stu- dents in the field ofpower engineering. Dr. NealJ. Balu Program Manager PowerSystem Planningand Operations Program Electrical System Division ~ Contents 1. General Aspects of Electric Power Systems 1 11 BriefSurveyofPower System Analysis and Operation 1 1.2 Active PowerTransmission usingElementary Models 3 1.3 Reactive PowerTransmission usingElementary Models 6 14 Difficulties with Reactive PowerTransmission 9 15 Short Circuit Capacity, Short CircuitRatio, and Voltage Regulation 13 References 16 2.

What is Voltage Stability? 17 2.1 VoltageStability, Voltage Collapse, andVoltage Security 17 2.2 Time Frames forVoltage Instability, Mechanisms 19 2.3 RelationofVoltage Stability to RotorAngle Stability 24 2.4 Voltage Instability in Mature Power Systems 26 2.5 Introduction to Voltage StabilityAnalysis: P-VCurves 27 2.6 Introduction toVoltage StabilityAnalysis: V-Q Curves 31 2.7 Graphical Explanation ofLonger-Term Voltage Stability 34 2.8 Summary 38 References 39 3. Transmission System Reactive Power Compensation and Control m4 3.1 Transmission System Characteristics 41 3.2 Series Capacitors 48 3.3 Shunt Capacitor Banks and Shunt Reactors 51 3.4 Static VarSystems 53 3.5 Comparisons between Series and Shunt Compensation 59 3.6 Synchronous Condensers 61 3.7 Transmission Network LTC Transformers 63 References 64 4. Power System Loads 67 4.1 Overview ofSubtransmission andDistribution Networks67 4.2 Staticand Dynamic Characteristics ofLoad Components 72 4.3 Reactive Compensation ofLoads 92 4.4 LTC Transformers and Distribution Voltage Regulators 94 References 105 xii Contents 5. Generation Characteristics 109 5.1 Generator Reactive PowerCapability 109 5.2 Generator Control and Protection 117 5.3 SystemResponse to Power Impacts 122 5.4 PowerPlant Response 127 5.5 Automatic Generation Control (AGC) 129 References 135 6. Simulation of Equivalent Systems 139 6.1 Equivalent System 1: Steady-State Simulation 139 6.2 Equivalent System 1: Dynamic Simulation 142 6.3 Equivalent System 2: Steady-State Simulation 146 6.4 Equivalent System 2: Dynamic Simulation 154 References 156 7. Voltage Stability of a Large System 159 TA System Description 160 7.2 Load Modeling and Testing 161 7.3 Power FlowAnalysis 166 TA Dynamic Performance Including Undervoltage Load Shedding 170 75 Automatic Control ofMechanicallySwitchedCapacitors 174 References 179 8.

Voltage Stability with HVDC Links 181 8.1 Basic Equations forHVDC 183 8.2 HVDC Operation 187 8.3 Voltage Collapse 191 8.4 VoltageStabilityConcepts Based on ShortCircuitRatio 192 8.5 Power System Dynamic Performance 199 References 200 9. Power System Planning and Operating Guidelines 203 9.1 Reliability Criteria 203 9.2 Solutions: Generation System 208 9.3 Solutions: Transmission System 210 9.4 Solutions: Distribution and Load Systems 215 9.5 PowerSystem Operation 218 9.6 Summary: the Voltage StabilityChallenge 221 References 221 xiii Appendices: A. Notes on the Per Unit System 225 B. Voltage Stability and the Power Flow Problem 229 B.1 The Nodal Admittance Matrix 229 B.2 The Newton-Raphson method 231 B-3 Modal Analysis ofPower Flow Model 236 B4 Fast Decoupled Methods 239 B5 Power Flow Analysis forVoltage Stability 240 B.6 Voltage Stability Static Indices and Research Areas 240 References 242 C. Power Flow Simulation Methodology 245 D. Dynamic Analysis Methods for Longer-Term Voltage Stability 251 E. Equivalent System 2 Data 257 F. Voltage Instability Incidents 261 Index 271 General Aspects of Electri. c Power Systems Everythingyou know is easy. Serbian saying Power system voltage stability involves generation, transmission, and dis- tribution. Voltage stability is closelyassociated with otheraspects ofpower system steady-state and dynamic performance. Voltage control, reactive power compensation and management, rotor angle (synchronous) stability, protective relaying, and control center operations all influence voltage stability. Before introducingvoltage stability inthe nextchapter, wereview aspects ofpower system engineering important to power system planning andoperatingengineers. 11 Brief Survey of PowerSystem Analysisand Operation In this book, our overriding concern is power system security. We must avoid failures and blackouts ofthe bulk power delivery system.

Economic system operation is ofsecondary importance during emergency conditions, butis important during normal conditions. In system design and operation weneed abalance between economy and security. Disturbances. A large interconnected power system is exposed to many disturbances which threaten security. Recent requirements for more inten- siveuseofavailablegeneration andtransmission have magnified the possi- ble effects of these disturbances. For three-phase power systems, the disturbances can be divided into balanced and unbalanced disturbances. Unbalanced disturbances are normally caused by short circuits (faults) affecting only one or two of the phases; faults involving ground are the most common. Balanced disturbances result from transmission line and 2 Chapter 1, General Aspects ofElectricPower Systems generation outages, and from load changes. Following any disturbance, electromechanical oscillations occurbetween generators. Computer simulation programs. Large-scale computer simulation pro- grams for studying power system steady-state and dynamic performance include short circuit programs, power flow programs, small-signal stability (eigenvalue) programs, transient stability programs, and longer-term dynamicsprograms. Powerflow programsarebasictopower system analysis, planning, and operation. Similar network powerflow computation techniques are usedin other software foroptimal power flow, dynamic simulation, on-line security assessment, andstate estimation. Powerflowprograms normally represent the generation and transmission systems in the sinusoidal fundamental- frequency steady-state under balanced conditions. Loads are usually lumped at bulk power delivery substation busses. A solved case provides the voltage magnitudes and angles at each bus, and the real and reactive power flows. Appendix B describes the power flow problem.

Time domain transient stability programs are used to determine rotor angle synchronous stability performance—both the “first swing” and sub- sequent transient damping. The dynamic performance ofinduction motors and various controls can also be evaluated. Numerical integration is the computation method. Eigenvalue and related methods are also useful in evaluating electromechanical stability of linearized systems—damping of low-frequency oscillations and the effects of controls are often studied. These subjects are described in depth inthe companion bookPower System Stabilityand Control by Dr. Prabha Kundur. Longer-term dynamics programs evaluate slowerdynamics. These pro- grams arediscussed later chapters andinAppendix D. Controls. Various power system controls—local and centralized—are importantinvoltage stability. The local controls, particularly atgenerating plants, are automatic andrelatively high speed. Directand indirectcontrol ofloads are critical for voltage stability. Each company or control area has a central control or dispatch center whereslower automatic and manual control commands areissuedtopower plants and substations. The primary centralized automatic control is Auto- matic Generation Control (AGC). Centralized voltage control usuallyhas a “man-in-the-loop.” Other than telephone communication, there is seldom central control atthe synchronous interconnection level. Large-scale systems. Electric power systems are the largest man-made dynamic systems on earth. Networks comprise thousands ofnodes and the significant dynamics are equivalent to thousands of first-order nonlinear = 1.2Active PowerTransmission usingElementary Models 3 differential equations. At any instant in time, generationmust match load. Generators thousands of kilometers apart connected by highly-loaded transmission circuits mustoperate in synchronism. This must be donereli- ably through the daily load cycle and fordisturbance conditions.

Electric power systems are comprised ofgeneration, transmission, and distribution/loads. These three subsystems must operate together as an overall system. We must understand each subsystem. Equally important, we must understand how they relate; this system engineering is shown by the intersection areas ofFigure 1-1. Voltage stability is only one aspect ofpower system engineering. But it isavery interesting one! Generation Transmission Vy xs \ KS RX SIeeNs N M7“ a po [——————} _ Powersystem engineering, \_____} __ Powersystem controls, \——/ Powersystem planning and TH operation Distribution and loads Fig. 1-1. Domains of power system engineering. With cogeneration and independent power producers, system engineering between generation and distribution is required. 1.2 Active PowerTransmission using Elementary Models In this section and the next, we review the basics ofelectric power trans- mission. To facilitate understanding, we use simple models. Once basic concepts are understood, wecanrepresentas much detail as appropriate in computer simulation. Active (real) and reactive power transmission depend on the voltage magnitude and angles at the sending and receivingends. Figure 1-2 shows our model; synchronous machines are indicated at both ends. The sending- and receiving-end voltages are assumed fixed and can be interpreted as 4 Chapter 1, General Aspects ofElectric Power Systems points in large systems where voltages are stiffor secure. The sending and receiving ends are connected by an equivalent reactance. Transmission line vy eq84uivalent Vv. os, Equivalent Equivalent sending-end T T receiving-end system il} system * Thévenin or delta-wye E,2Z6 . Ls. £40 Fig. 1-2. Elementary model forcalculation ofreal and reactive power trans- mission.

The relations can beeasily calculated: S,=P,+jQ,=E. =E [Faces sin] n,n E,E, . bei [7%cos6-E?| asind+j a P, EE, . . = —x sind = Prax Sind (1.1) Q, E,E,cos5~E? x (1.2) = Similarly, forthe sending end: Po= EE, . . xsind = P,,,, sind (1.3) 1.2Active PowerTransmissionusingElementaryModels 5 E®-E,E,cos6 Q, = > 2 (1.4) The familiarequations for P, and P, are equal because wehavea loss- less system; maximum power transfer is ata power orload angle 6equal to 90°. Figure 1-3 shows the plot of Equation 1.1 or 1.3, termed the power- angle curve. The 90° maximum power angle is nominal—maximum power occurs at a different angle ifwe included transmission losses or resistive shuntloads. Inthe nextchapter, wewilldescribe thecasewherethe receiv- ingend is an impedance load. Prnax P Load line 0 / Stable Unstable 0 30 60 90 120 150 180 Angle -degrees Fig. 1-3. Power angle curve forelementary model. Also shown on Figure 1-3 is a load line representing constant sending end mechanical (turbine) power. The stable intersection ofthe mechanical power and the electrical power-angle curve is on the left at an angle less than90°. The rightsideintersection isunstable. Tounderstandthis, letthe receiving-end system be very large, an infinite bus with fixed angle and speed. Asmall increase in mechanical power at the sending-end generator (by opening the steam valves or water gates) accelerates the generator, thereby increasing the angle. Theincreased angle results in less electrical power which further accelerates the generator and further increases the angle.

On the left-side intersection, however, the increased angle increases the electrical power tomatch the increased mechanical power. 6 Chapter 1, General Aspects ofElectric Power Systems Fortypical powertransfers andpowerangles, say up to 30°,wecanlin- earize Equations 1.1 and 1.3 bythe relation sind= 6with Sin radians. (For example, thirty degrees is 0.5236 radians and sin 30° = 0.5; notethenearly linear relationship forsmall angles on Figure 1-3.) Wethen write: P=P,,,5 and state: Real oractivepower transferdepends mainly on thepowerangle. Toinsure steady-state rotor angle(synchronous)stability, angles across a transmission system areusually keptbelow about 44° . 1.3 Reactive PowerTransmission using Elementary Models In this book, we are especially interested in the transmission ofreactive power. First, we can return to the power-angle curve and note that the reactive requirements of the sending and receiving ends are excessive at high angles and correspondingly high real power transfers. Making the assumption that EF, = E,, Figure 1-4 showsa plot for Q, = —Q,. Atthe90° steady-state stability limit, the reactive power that must be generated at the two sources is equal to P,,,,,.(Referring to Figure 1-2, partofthe reac- tive power is provided bytransmission linecapacitance). 2Pnaz Q, = -Q, = Pr(1a- coxsd) / Za 0 —_ 0 30 60 90 120 150 180 Angle - degrees Fig. 1-4. Power-angle curve for elementary model. Also shown is the curve forreactive powerwith E, = E,. 1.3 Reactive PowerTransmission usingElementary Models 7 Usually we are interested invariable voltage magnitudes. Particularly, we are interested in the reactive power that can be transmitted across a transmission line, a transmission line equivalent, or a transformer as the receiving- orload-end voltage sags during a voltage emergency or collapse. Referring to Figure 1-2, we now consider reactive power flow over the transmission line alone and rewrite Equations 1.2 and 1.4 in terms of V,2@ and V,26.

Also, X now represents the transmission line reactance alone. V,V,cos0-V? Q, = = ¥ tt (1.5). V?-V,V,cos@ Q, = a a (1.6). Wecan writeapproximate formulas forsmall angles by using cos= 1: Q, V.(V, -V,) = a a (1.7) Q, V,(V,-V,) = (1.8) From Equations 1.7-1.8, we state: Reactive power transmission dependsmainlyon voltage magnitudes andflowsfrom thehighest voltageto thelowest voltage. Also: ¢ Pand Sare closely coupled, and * QandVare closely coupled. These physical relationships are taken advantage ofin computer algo- rithms, notably the fast decoupled powerflow (Appendix B). Next, we examine how these relationships break down during high stress,i.e., high powertransfers andangles. This is important since voltage stability problems normally occur during highly stressed conditions (usu- ally following outages). Example 1-1. First let’s simply calculate Q, and Q, using Equations 1.5 and 1.6foran angle of30°. Let V, be 1 per unit and let V, be 0.9 per unit. We havea substantial voltage gradient of 10% between the two ends and wemightexpect large reactive powertransfer. We calculate: cos 30° = 0.866 8 Chapter 1, General Aspects ofElectric Power Systems Q. = 1?-1-0.9-0.866 _ 0.22 s x x g, = 1:09: 0.866-0.97 _ 0.03 r x _ xX We have a problem! Although lots of reactive power is going into the line, nothingiscomingout. The negative value means, in fact, thatthe line is demanding reactive power of 0.03/X pu from the receiving end. The transmission line has become a drain on the transmission system. The transmission line reactive loss is the sum ofthe reactive powers going into theline or0.25/Xpu. Powercirclediagrams. P, Q circle diagrams are a more general and pre- cise way ofunderstanding power transmission limitations. Circle diagrams were widely used prior to digital computer power flow programs, and are described in several textbooks on power system analysis and in the West- inghouseT&Dbook . The nextexample demonstrates this method. Example 1-2.

A 500-kV transmission line is 161 km (100 miles) long. We include the line shunt capacitance using a pi transmission line model. For simplicity, and with little error, we can let the line be lossless. Correspond- ing to an actual Bonneville Power Administration line with three subcon- ductor per phase, the total series reactance is 51.6 ohms and the total shunt susceptance is 809 microsiemens (micromhos). In per unit on a 500- kV and 1000 MVA base, the reactance and susceptance parameters are 0.2064 per unit and 0.2023 per unit, respectively. (One thousand mega- watts is approximatelythe 500-kV line natural orsurge impedance loading and is a convenient power base; the impedance base is 250 ohms which is approximately the surge impedance.) UsingABCD generalized circuit con- stants forthe pi model, the parameters are: A=D= 144% = 0.9791 pu B = Z = j0.2064 C= v.20 = j0.2002 We consider two cases: Case 1 has V, = 1 per unit and V, = 0.95 per unit; Case 2 has V, = 1 per unit and V, = 0.9 per unit. Because the line is lossless, the centerofall sending- and receiving-end circles are onthe verti- cal reactive power axis. The two cases result in two sending end and two ] 1.4 Difficulties with Reactive PowerTransmission 9 receiving circles. The circle centers and radii (same for both sending and receiving ends) are: Centerceng D F = “3 = j4.7437 pu Center,,. Ay_.. = =V, = —j4.2812 for V, = 0.95 pu 8 Centerye. Ay. = BY = —j3.8451 pu for V, = 0.9 pu . V,V, Radius = 3 = —4.6028 pu for V_ = 0.95 pu Radius = a = -4.3605 pu for V, = 0.9 pu Figure 1-5 shows the power circle curves. The solid circles are forCase 1 and the dashed circles are for Case 2. For anyspecified real power trans- fer, we can drawa vertical line. The intersection ofthe vertical line and a circle gives reactive power. Also, for a specified real power, the angle between the vertical axis and a line drawn froma circle center to the point onthe circle is the powerangle 0.

Concentrating on the receiving-end circles, we clearly see when reac- tive power becomes negative—and the transmission line becomes a drain on the receiving-end system. For V, = 0.95 per unit, the power value is about 1700 MW. For V, = 0.9 per unit, the power value is about2250MW. We also note the high reactive power requirements from the sending- and receiving-end systems atvery high real power transfers. Thecorresponding angles canbe determined graphically oranalytically(Equation 1.1). At high loadings the curves become steep, meaning that more than one megavar is required foreach additional megawatt transmitted. The same method can be used for series/parallel combinations oftrans- mission lines. Generalized circuit constants (ABCD constants) facilitate converting the lines to a single pi equivalent. 1.4 Difficulties with Reactive PowerTransmission The last section hinted at one difficulty with reactive power transmission: Reactive power cannot be transmitted across large power angles even with substantial voltage magnitude gradients. High angles are due to longlines and high real power transfers. Requirements to maintain voltage magni- tude profiles with voltages ofapproximately 1 per unit + 5% contribute to 10 Chapter 1, General Aspects ofElectricPower Systems Reactive / Power - pu / / 2 . . / Sending-end circles. Sy » 7 Vr=09 » SAV,=0.95 12 - -- -— - ~e_ _ -_— ~ N Real Power - pu 11N34 N Vy=0.95 N.NVr=0.9 1 INS Receiving-end circles \ \ 2 Fig. 1-5. Powercircle diagram for a 161 km, 500-kV transmission line with one per unit sending-end voltage and depressed receiving-end voltages. One perunitpoweris 1000 MVA. the difficulty. Contrasted with real power transfers, reactive power simply cannot be transmitted long distances. There are other reasons to minimize transfer ofreactive power. Mini- mizing real and reactive losses is a second reason.

Real losses should be minimized for economic reasons; reactive losses should be minimized to reduce investmentin reactive power devices such as shunt capacitors. The losses across the series impedance ofa transmission line are [?R and [?X. For I”, we canwrite: Pap=yce = [-Pje (PSA ) =P24+@O2 Vv Vv v’ = 1.4 Difficulties with Reactive PowerTransmission 11 and Ping 2p _ P2°4 +Q92 = UR = a— R (1.10) oss 2 P?+Q? = PX = GX (LD. To minimize losses, we must minimize reactive power transfer. We should also keep voltages high. Keeping voltages high to minimize reactive losses helps maintain voltage stability. Minimizing temporary overvoltage due to “load rejection” is a third reason.The mostonerouscase isopening the receiving-end circuitbreakers withthe transmission line still energized from the sending end. Figure 1-6 shows an equivalent system and an even simpler thévenin circuit. Also shown is the resulting phasor diagram. Prior to the breaker opening, thethévenin voltage is: Ey, yy wyPr JQ, XQ, XP, 26 = VZ0+jXI = V+jX—— = V+ vy ti (1.12). From the equation and phasor diagram, we note that the voltage rise term in phase with Vdepends on Q. This term mainly determines E,,(the thévenin voltage magnitude). The angle, 5, depends mainly on the quadra- ture terminvolvingP. What happens when the breaker is opened? What does the voltage at the open end ofthe line become? Clearly, the current goes to zero and the voltage becomes E,,. Thus the temporary overvoltage is largely deter- mined bythe reactive powertransfer. Two examples will showthis. Example 1-3. A 100 km, 500-kV line has a series reactance ofX = 0.35 Q/ km. The power transmitted is 1000 MWor1 per unit. The impedance base is 250 ohms and the transmission line reactance is 0.14 per unit. At the source end, the short circuit capacity” is 5000 MWor5 per unit; the corre- sponding source reactance is 1/5 or 0.2 perunit. The total reactance is 0.34 perunit. Thelineisrelatively shortbutthe source is relatively weak.

Let V =1 per unit. Consider two cases: unity power factor load and 0.85 power factorload. Case 1: cos¢= 1, Q, = 0, *Short circuitcapacity isdiscussed in the nextsection. 12 Chapter 1, General Aspects ofElectric PowerSystems Vv ~ On ett S; Load Thévenin equivalent Ey, 26 . V4 . ©) ix S, = P,+jQ, at Ey,25 XP, a. VXQ, Vv Fig. 1-6. Equivalent system for load rejection calculation. By,25= V+iX—P,t = 14j°88:1 = 1.056218.8° Case2: cos o= 0.85, Q, = P,tang = 0.62 pu, E,, 25 = 1+ (0.34 - 0.62) +j (0.34-1) = 1.211+j0.341 = 1.258 215.7° The delivery of0.62 pu reactive power has increased the fundamental frequency load rejection overvoltage from 1.056 per unit to 1.258 per unit. The next example is more dramatic. Example 1-4. This example involves a high voltage direct current (HVDC) transmission link connected to a weak power system. The thévenin reac- tance is 0.625, corresponding to the inverse of the “effective short circuit ratio” (ESCR) which is 1.6. Several existing HVDC links have such a high network reactance. HVDC converters consume reactive powerof50-60% of the de power. Let the de powerbe 1 per unit and the reactive consumption 1.5 ShortCircuitCapacity,ShortCircuitRatio,andVoltageRegulation 13 y S = P+jQ Ey, 25 ix VQ, x ; Fig. 1-7. Example 1-3, HVDC link fed from high reactance network. be 0.6 per unit; also, let the converter commutating bus voltage be 1 per unit. See Figure 1-7. Using Equation 1.12, the thévenin voltage is: 26 = 1+ (0.625 - 0.6) +j (0.625-1) = 1.51224° Ey, Forde shutdown orblocking, the acside voltage willjump to anintoler- able level of 1.51 per unit! Measures mustbe taken to prevent such a high load rejection voltage. (One measure would be to produce the reactive power locally with a synchronous condenser—this increases the effective shortcircuitcapacity andcorrespondinglyreduces the thévenin reactance.) Note that ifthe de converter is an inverter, the same problem occurs; only the signs ofthe dc power and ofthe thévenin angle are changed.

Rectifiers and inverters consume similar amounts ofreactive power. Whenever possible, reactive power should be generated close to the point of consumption. We can list several reasons to minimize reactive power transfer: 1. It is inefficient during high real power transfer and requires substantial voltage magnitude gradients. 2. Itcauses high real and reactive powerlosses. 3. It can lead to damaging temporary overvoltages following load rejections. 4. It requires larger equipment sizes fortransformers and cables. 1.5 ShortCircuit Capacity,Short Circuit Ratio,andVoltageRegulation We now discuss some terms used in the previous section. These are useful in describing the voltage (as opposed to mechanical or inertial) strength ofa network. The concepts are useful for simple calculations prior tocomputerstudies. Shortcircuitcapacity. Theshortcircuitcapacity orpowerofanetwork is the product of three-phase fault current and rated voltage. In physical units, with shortcircuit current in kiloamperes andphase-to-phase voltage 14 Chapter 1, General Aspects ofElectric Power Systems in kilovolts, the shortcircuitcapacity is: S,, = /3xVxI MVA We, however, will generally use per unit quantities. The short circuit capacity is then simply the product ofvoltage (usually one per unit) and fault current. The fault current is usually considered to be rated (one per unit) voltage divided by the impedance or reactance to the fault location. With one per unit voltages, the short circuit capacity is then the system admittance (or susceptance), or the inverse ofthe system thévenin imped- ance(orreactance). The short circuit capacity and thévenin impedance can be computed withashortcircuit program.A transient stability program can also beused by applying a three-phase fault and noting the initial current flow to the fault point. The short circuit capacity measures the system voltage strength. A high capacity (and corresponding low impedance) means the network is strong or stiff.

Switching on a load, or a shunt capacitor or reactor, will not change the voltage magnitude very much. A low short circuit capacity means the networkis weak. Short circuit ratio (SCR). We sometimes wish to compare the size of equipment to the strength ofthe power system. The equipment could be a load (such as a large motor), an HVDC converter, ora static varcompensa- tor. Asimple comparison isto divide the system strengthbythe device size. Comparinga 1000 MWHVDCconverterto5000 MVAshortcircuitcapacity power system results in a short circuitratio of5000/1000 or 5. Ahigh short circuit ratio means good performance. Alow short circuit ratio means trou- ble: for example, a large motor connected to a weak point on the network may stall or have difficulty reaccelerating following faults. Motor starting will cause system voltage dips. A related term, used especially with HVDC, is effective short circuit ratio (ESCR). The basic SCR accounts for only the network strength while ESCR accounts for shunt reactive equipment at the device location. Asyn- chronous condenser clearly increases the fault current and therefore the effective short circuit capacity. On the other hand, shunt capacitors and harmonic filters (which are capacitive at fundamental frequency) reduce the ESCR. Short circuit capacity related measures do not account for the fast- acting controls of static var compensators, generator voltage regulators, and HVDC converters. Methods which include control effects are described in Chapter 8. 1.5 ShortCircuitCapacity, ShortCircuitRatio, andVoltage Regulation 15 Voltage regulation. Several widely used approximate formulas involve system short circuit capacity [3, Chapter 1]. The formulas provide the volt- agedeviationfor switching shunt reactive equipment. They are: AV=aA @ (1.18). S. and vegii- 2] (1.14), Sve Example 1-5.A200-MVaAr capacitor is switched atabus with 10,000 MVA short circuit capacity. The expected voltage change is 200/10,000 or 2%.

This approximate result canbechecked bycomputerpower floworstability simulation. Example 1-6. Abus experiences +3%voltagefluctuations. The short circuit capacity is 5000 MVA. We wish to size a static var compensator (SVC) to smooth the voltage fluctuations. Using Equation 1.13, we can write: AQ=S,,A V. The approximate SVC size is then +150 MVAr. Equation 1.14 approximates an even simpler equation expressing the voltage drop from the sourcetoloadpoint. Thatis: V = E—jXI. Figure 1-8 is aplot ofEquation 1.14 and shows the system voltage/reactive character- v System 7 \E characteristic Ths ‘ Gradient = £ ‘ Sx te 0 Yn Q Fig. 1-8. System approximate voltage/reactive powercharacteristic. 16 Chapter 1, General AspectsofElectricPowerSystems istic or load line. The slope of the load line is related to the system stiffness— a nearly flat slope meansa strong system. The voltage/reactive characteristics of shunt reactive devices (capacitor, reactor, or static var compensator) can be superimposed on the system characteristic. In the next chapter, we introduce V-Q curves produced by computer power flow simulation. The system characteristic will not be linear at high inductive loading. The dashed portion ofFigure 1-8 gives a hint ofvoltage problems. References 1. R. D. Dunlop, R. Gutman, and P. P. Marchenko, “Analytical Development of Loadability Characteristics for EHV and UHV Transmission Lines,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-98, No. 2, pp. 606-617, March/April 1979. 2. Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electrical Transmission and Distribution ReferenceBook, EastPittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 1964. 3. T.J.E. Miller,editor, ReactivePowerControl inElectricSystems, JohnWiley & Sons, NewYork, 1982. What i. s Voltage Stabialpie ty? Make everything as simpleaspossible, but not more so. A. Einstein Wenowintroducevoltagestability,thesubjectofthisbook. First,wepresent somedefinitions.

Then, wedescribe voltage instability mechanisms andthe relation with rotor angle stability. Next, we discuss the reasons forvoltage stability problems in mature power systems. Wefinishbyintroducingstatic voltage stability analysis usingP-Vand V-Q curves. 24 VoltageStability, Voltage Collapse, and Voltage Security Voltage stability covers a wide range ofphenomena. Because ofthis, volt- age stability means different things to different engineers. It’s a fast phe- nomenon for engineers involved with induction motors, air conditioning loads, or HVDC links. It’s a slow phenomenon (involving, for example, mechanical tap changing) for other engineers. Engineers and researchers have discussed appropriate analysis methods, with debate on whether volt- age stability is a static ordynamic phenomenon. Voltage instability and voltage collapse are used somewhat inter- changeablyby mostengineers. Voltage stability or voltage collapse has often been viewed as a steady- state “viability” problem suitable for static (power flow) analysis. The abil- itytotransfer reactivepowerfrom production sourcestoconsumption sinks during steady operating conditions is a major aspect ofvoltage stability. A 1987 CIGRE report recommends analysis methods and power system planning approaches based on static models. The network maximum power transferlimit is notnecessarily the volt- agestability limit. Voltage instability or collapse is a dynamic process. The word “stabil- ity” implies a dynamic system. A power system is a dynamic system. We will see that, in contrast to rotor angle (synchronous) stability, the dynam- 18 Chapter2,Whatis Voltage Stability? ics mainlyinvolves the loads and the meansforvoltage control. Voltage sta- bility hasbeen called load stability . Definitions. Voltage stability is a subset ofoverall power system stability. We adopt definitions developed by CIGRE . The definitions are based on reference 4 and are in the spirit ofreferences 5-7.

The stability definitions are analogous to stability definitions for other dynamic system. Our defini- tions are: Apower system at a given operatingstate issmall-disturbance volt- age stable if, following any small disturbance, voltages near loads are identical or close to the pre-disturbance values. (Small-distur- bance voltage stability corresponds to a related linearized dynamic model with eigenvalues having negative real parts. For analysis, discontinuous modelsfortapchangers mayhave to be replacedwith equivalentcontinuousmodels.) A power system at a given operating state and subject to a given disturbance is voltage stable ifvoltages near loads approach post- disturbance equilibrium values. The disturbed state is within the region ofattraction ofthe stable post-disturbance equilibrium.” Apower system ata given operatingstate andsubjectto agiven dis- turbance undergoes voltage collapse ifpost-disturbance equilibrium voltages are below acceptable limits. Voltage collapse may be total (blackout)orpartial. Voltage instability is the absence of voltage stability, and results in progressive voltage decrease (or increase). Destabilizing controls reaching limits, or other control actions (e.g., load disconnection), however, may establish global stability. Voltage stability normally involves large disturbances (including rapid increases in load or power transfer). Furthermore the instability is almost always an aperiodic decrease in voltage. Oscillatory voltage instability may be possible , but control instabilities are excluded. Control instabilities could occur, for example, because oftoo high a gain on a static var compen- sator or too small a deadband in a voltage relay controlling a shunt capaci- tor bank. Overvoltage phenomena and instability such as self-excitation of rotating machines are outside the scope ofthe definitions.

Overvoltages are *Equilibrium pointsandregions ofattraction are described inthenext sec- tion. . 2.2 Time FramesforVoltage Instability, Mechanisms 19 normally more of an equipment problem than a power system stability problem. The term voltage security is used. This means the ability ofa system, not only to operate stably, but also to remain stable following credible con- tingenciesorloadincreases . Itoftenmeansthe existence ofconsiderable margin from an operating point to the voltage instability point (or to the maximum power transfer point) followingcredible contingencies. Although voltage stability involves dynamics, power flow based static analysis methods areoften useful for rapid, approximate analysis. 2.2 Time Frames for Voltage Instability, Mechanisms Voltage instability and collapse dynamics spana range in time froma frac- tion ofa second to tens ofminutes. Time response charts have been used to describe dynamic phenomena [10,11]. Figure 2-1 shows that many power system components and controls playa rolein voltage stability. Only some, however, will significantly participate in a particular incident or scenario. The system characteristics and the disturbance will determine which phe- nomena are important. Figure 2-1 also showsa classification ofvoltage stability into transient and longer-term time frames. There is almost always a clear separation ‘Transient Voltage Stability Longer-Term Voltage Stability InductionMotorDynamics Load/PowerTransferIncrease Generator/Excitation Dynamics LTCTranst. &Dist.VoltageReg PrimeMoverControl LoadDiversity/Thermostat Mech. SwitchedCapacitors/Reactors __Excitation Limiting GasTurbine Start-up Undervoltageloadshedding PowerplantOperator svc GenerationChange/AGC GeneratorInertialDynamics BoilerDynamics _ Line/Transf.Overload oc DCConverterLTCs SystemOperator Protective RelayingIncludingOverload Protection 1 Minto 10Minutes 1 Hour ! 1 0.1 1 10 100 1000 10000 Time-seconds Fig. 2-1.

Voltage stability phenomena and timeresponses. 20 Chapter2,Whatis Voltage Stability? between the two time frames. Actual incidents experienced by utilities are groupedbytime frame inAppendix F. Mechanisms—scenarios: We now describe the two classifications ofvolt- age instability. Only the basic ideas are described in this introduction. We describe three scenarios. 1. Scenario 1: transient voltage stability. The time frame is zero to about ten seconds—which is also the time frame oftransient rotor angle stability. The distinction between voltage instability and rotor angle insta- bility isn’t always clear, and aspects ofboth phenomena may exist. Does voltage collapse cause loss of synchronism, or does loss of synchronism cause voltage collapse? Voltage collapse is caused by unfavorable fast- acting load components such as induction motors and de converters. For severe voltage dips (such as during slowly-cleared short circuits), the reactive power demand of induction motors increases, contributing to voltage collapse unless protection or ac contactors trip the motors. (This has also been termed induction motor instability .) Following faults, motors have difficulty reaccelerating. Stall-prone motors can cause other nearby motors to stall. In simulation studies, motors must be represented as dynamic devices. The characteristic ofshunt capacitor bank compensa- tion (reactive power proportional to the voltage squared) adds to the prob- lems. Electrical islanding and underfrequency load shedding studies have shown probable voltage collapse when the imbalance in the island is greater than about 50%. Voltage decays fasterthan frequency—the voltage decay affects voltage-sensitive loads, slowingfrequency decay and delaying underfrequency load shedding. Also, underfrequency relays may not oper- ate because ofthe low voltages. Undervoltage load shedding may be neces- sary.

Foran incident in Florida, Figure 2-2 shows voltage collapsingbefore frequency decays tothe underfrequency load shedding setpoints. Induction motor loads,includingpowerplant auxiliarymotors, wereimportant inthe incident. In recent years, the integration ofhigh voltage direct current (HVDC) links into voltage-weak powersystems has caused transient voltage stabil- ity problems . As an example, for stressed conditions and for large dis- turbances,simulations haveshownvoltage collapse tendencies in Southern California, aggravatedbythetwo large inverter stations near LosAngeles. Sometimes (at theexpense ofsynchronizing power) it’s necessary to reduce de power (and thereby converter reactive power demand) to support volt- ages. Chapter 8 describes voltage stability withHVDC links. 2. Scenario 2: longer-term voltage stability. The time frame is several minutes, typically two-three minutes. Operator intervention is often not 2.2 Time Frames forVoltage Instability, Mechanisms 21 250 61 225 60.5 > 200 Freqquueennccyy 60 # z. 275 59.5 5 Kj fom S$ 150 59 2 uw 125 Voltage 58.5 100 58 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 Time - Seconds Fig. 2-2. Voltage and frequency forSouth Florida blackout on May 17, 1985 . (SeeAppendix F forfurther description.) possible. The terms “mid-term” stability, and “post-transient” or “post-dis- turbance” stability have been used. This scenarioinvolves high loads, high power importsfrom remote gen- eration, and a sudden large disturbance. The system is transiently stable because of the voltage sensitivity ofloads. The disturbance (loss of large generators in a load area or loss ofmajor transmission lines) causes high reactive power losses and voltage sags in load areas. Tap changers on bulk power delivery LTC" transformers and distribution voltage regulators sense the low voltages and act to restore distribution voltages—thereby restoringloadpowerlevels. The load restoration causes further sags of transmission voltages.

Nearby generators are overexcited and overloaded, but overexcitation limiters (or power plant operators) return field currents to rated values as the time-overload capability (one to two minutes) expires. Generators far- therawaymust then provide thereactive power. Asdescribed in Chapter 1, this is inefficient and ineffective. The generation and transmission system can no longer support the loads and the reactive losses, and rapid voltage decay ensues. Partial or complete voltage collapse follows. The final stages *ThetermsLTC(LoadTapChanging), ULTC(Under-loadTapChanging), and OLTC(On-LoadTapChanging)are widely used.Weuse“LTC”sinceit isthetermspecifiedinIEEEStandardDictionaryofElectricalandElec- tronicTerms,ANSVIEEE Std 100-1988. 22 Chapter2, WhatisVoltage Stability? may involve induction motor stalling and protective relay operations. Depending on the type ofloads (including means for disconnection at low voltage)the collapse maybe partial or total. 3. Scenario 3: longer-term voltage instability. The instability evolves overa still longer time period and is driven by a very large load buildup (morning or afternoon pickup), or a large rapid power transfer increase. The load buildup, measured in megawatts/minute, may be quite rapid. Operator actions, such as timely application of reactive power equipment or load shedding, may be necessary to prevent instability. Factors such as the time-overload limit oftransmission lines (tens ofminutes) and loss of load diversity due to low voltage (due to constant energy, thermostatically controlled loads) may be important. The final stages ofinstability involve actions offasterequipment as-described for scenarios 1 and 2. There are many interactions among the various equipment (Figure 2-1) and time frames. For example, tap changer regulation ofvoltages will pre- vent loss ofdiversity by thermostatic regulation ofconstant energy loads.

For another example, overexcitation limiter operation prevents normal generator voltage regulation. Mechanisms—load dynamics, equilibrium points, and region of attraction.” Voltage stability has been called load stability. The “load” is the load seen at transmission system high voltage busses and includes the effects of subtransmission and distribution systems. The restoration of loads that have been temporary reduced because of low voltage is a key aspect ofvoltage stability. Active (real) load is restored by three mechanisms: 1. Induction motors respond rapidly to match their mechanical load within a few seconds following sudden changes in voltage. Immediately following a sudden change in the source system, induction motorsacts asimpedance loads;thisisapparentfrom the well-known equivalent circuit, consideringthat slip cannot changeinstantaneously because ofmotor inertia. Forslow volt- age decay, fast-responding motors track the slow dynamics of otherequipment, acting as constant active powerloads. 2. Automatic tap changing on bulk power delivery transformers and distribution voltage regulators operates over tens of sec- onds to several minutes to restore load-side voltage, and thus *Ifthis subsection isdifficult, skim itandreturn afterreadingtherestof thischapterandChapter4.References 5,6, and 15provideexpanded explanation. 23 voltage sensitive loads. Reactive powerload and reactive power output ofshunt compensation are also restored. 3. Constant energy resistive loads are restored by thermostatic or manual control. For aggregated loads this results in a loss of load diversity over a period oftime following a voltage reduc- tion.

As a first approximation, the dynamics of all three load restoration mechanisms are first order and can be modeled usinga single time con- stant. (For tap changing, involving deadbands, voltage and timer relays, and discrete taps, the approximation is quite crude.) Although the time constants are different, the equations are similar in form and the load res- toration mechanisms can be unified forconceptual analysis [6,7]. The three types ofloadsmaybe present atone bulk powerdelivery loadbus as shown on Figure 2-3. Vv |? Q *— Tap changerdynamics regulating lowsidevoltage Induction motor. Constant energy dynamics T load dynamics Other loads Fig. 2-3. Three mechanisms forrestoration ofvoltage sensitive loads . The state variables for first order models ofthe three load restoration mechanisms can be taken, respectively, asmotor slip (s), tapchanger turns ratio (n), and load conductance (G). As each state variable increases from zero, load power increases, reaches a maximum, and then decreases (Fig- ure2-4).As the statevariable increases, voltage monotonicallydecreases. For induction motors, Figure 2-4 is similar to familiar torque-slip curves. The applicable firstorderdifferential equation is: 2Ha%s = Py-P, (2.1) where P, is the initial mechanical power which, for simplicity, is assumed constant. 24 Chapter2, What is Voltage Stability? P Pre-disturbance curve P Initial and final power 0 |1 |I | Final post-disturbance curve x x s,n,orG Fig. 2-4. Power versus state variable ofload dynamics. Adapted from Van Cutsem . For stability following a large disturbance, the slip at the moment of the final source system configuration (say, after fault clearing) must be within the “region of attraction” ofthe stable equilibrium point, x*. The region ofattraction extends to the unstable equilibrium point, x". Refer to Equation 2.1. For the region between x* and x", this is because P, is greater than P, and the motor will accelerate (slip will decrease) to x*.

For a large number of thermostatically-controlled heating loads, an applicable equation is: re = P,-ViG (2.2) The situation is similar to the induction motor case. For stability fol- lowing a large disturbance, the conductance at the moment of the final source system configuration (say, after circuit restoration and shunt capac- itor insertion) must be within the “region ofattraction” ofthe stable equi- librium point, x*. The region of attraction extends to the unstable equilibrium point, x". Refer to Equation 2.2. For the region between x* and x", this is because V?G is greater than P, and the thermostats will reduce conductance (and increase voltage) until point x* is reached. The situation with tap changers is again similar. In fact, the formula- tion could be changed so that the Equation 2.2 applies, whereG is the con- ductance reflected to the high voltage sideby tap changing . 2.3 Relation of Voltage Stability to RotorAngle Stability Voltage stability and rotor angle(orsynchronous) stability are more orless interlinked. Transient voltage stability is often interlinked with transient 2.3 Relation ofVoltage Stabilityto Rotor Angle Stability 25 rotor angle stability, and slower forms of voltage stability are interlinked with small-disturbance rotor angle stability. Often, the mechanisms are difficult to separate. There are many cases, however, where one form ofinstability predomi- nates. An IEEE report points out the extreme situations: (a) a remote synchronous generator connected by transmission lines to a large system (pure angle stability—the one machine to an infinite bus problem) and (b) asynchronous generatororlarge system connected bytransmission lines to an asynchronous load (pure voltage stability). Figure 2-5 shows these extremes. Large System (a) Pure angle stability Large System Load (b) Pure voltage stability Fig. 2-5. Simple examples showingextreme situations. Rotor angle stability, as well as voltage stability, is affectedby reactive power control.

In particular, small-disturbance (“steady-state”) instability involving aperiodically increasing angles was a major problem before continuously-acting generator automatic voltage regulators became avail- able. We can now see a connectionbetween small-disturbance angle stabil- ity and longer-term voltage stability: generator current limiting(sayby an overexcitation limiter) prevents normal automatic voltage regulation. Generator current limitingisverydetrimental tobothforms ofstability. Voltage stability is concerned with load areas and load characteristics. For rotor angle stability, we are often concerned with integrating remote power plants toa large systemover long transmission lines. Voltage stabil- ityisbasicallyloadstability, androtor anglestability is basicallygenerator stability. — 26 Chapter 2,WhatisVoltage Stability? In a large interconnected system, voltage collapse ofa load area is pos- sible without loss ofsynchronism ofanygenerators. Transient voltage stability is usually closely associated with transient rotor angle stability. Longer-term voltage stability is less interlinked with rotoranglestability. We can say thatifvoltage collapses at a pointin atransmission system remote from loads, it’s anangleinstability problem. Ifvoltage collapses in a load area, it’s probably mainly a voltage instability problem. 24 Voltage Instability in Mature PowerSystems Voltage problems are expected in developing power systems. Likewise, volt- age problems are expected following major system breakups. But why the recentconcern in mature power systems? One reason is intensive use of existing generation and transmission. This is because ofdifficulties in buildingnew generation in load areas, and difficulties in building transmission lines from remotely-sited generation. A second reason is increased use ofshunt capacitor banks for reactive powercompensation.

Excessiveuse ofshuntcapacitorbanks, while extend- ing transfer limits, results in a voltage collapse-prone (brittle or fragile) network. Shunt capacitor bank reactive power output decreases by the square ofvoltage, hence theterms brittle orfragile. Fast fault clearing, highperformance excitation systems, power system stabilizers, and othercontrols are effective in removing transient stability- imposed transfer limits. With transient stability-imposed limits removed, either thermal capacity orvoltage stability may dictate the transfer limits. An example provides insight into how voltage instability can become a problem in mature systems. Example 2-1. Figure 2-6 showsa five-line 500-kV transmission network. Transient stability is not a problem. What aboutthermal limits? Outage of one line requires the remaining lines to pick up only 25% ofthe power of the out-of-service line. Long EHV lines are typically loaded below one and one-halftimes surge impedance loading. Thermal limits are typicallyabout three times surge impedance loading. Unlike developingtwo- orthree-line transmission networks, thermal limits will seldom be limiting and trans- missioncanbehighly utilized. Now consider the effect ofthe five-line transmission system on voltage stability. We are fighting a nonlinear current-squared relation (I?X series reactive power loss). Near surge impedance loading, the current in each line is 1000 amperes; a line outage will increase series reactive losses from 1200 MVAr (5 lines x 3 phases x:1000? x 80 ohms) to 1500 MVAr—an increase of300 MVAr. Nowconsider several years load growth resultingin Z| 2.5 Introduction to Voltage StabilityAnalysis: P-V Curves 27 Po fea Po Five 500-kV lines, 250 km X = 0.32 ohms/ km or80 ohms Fig. 2-6. Five-line transmission system representing a mature power system. high utilization.

With 1500 ampere loading, an outage increases series reactive losses from 2700 MVAr to 3375 MVAr—an increase of675 MVAr or225% over the surge impedance loading case. You can make similar cal- culations for two line outages. The effects ofvoltage drops, which increase series reactive losses (Equation 1.11) and reduce reactive power generation from transmission line capacitance, are not included in these calculations; these effects make the situation even worse. Because of these nonlinear effects, voltage stability problems may develop over a period ofonly a few years. 25 Introduction to Voltage Stability Analysis: P-VCurves The slower forms ofvoltage instability are often analyzed as steady-state problems; power flow simulation is the primary study method. “Snapshots” in time following an outage or during load buildup are simulated. Besides these post-disturbance power flows, two other power flow based methods are widely used: P-Vcurves and V-Qcurves. These twomethods determine steady-state loadability limits which are related to voltage stability. Con- ventional powerflow programs can be used forapproximate analysis. P-V curves are useful for conceptual analysis of voltage stability and for study ofradial systems. The method is also used for large meshed net- works whereP is the total load in an area andV is the voltage ata critical or representative bus. P can also be the power transfer across a transmis- sion interface or interconnection. Voltage at several busses can be plotted. A disadvantageis thatthe powerflow simulation will diverge nearthe nose ormaximum powerpointon the curve.Another disadvantage is thatgener- ation mustbe realistically rescheduled as the area load is increased. For conceptual analysis, P-Vcurves are convenient when load charac- teristics as a function ofvoltage are analyzed. For examplea resistive load can be plotted with Pig = V*/R.

The opposite extreme of a constant 28 Chapter2, WhatisVoltage Stability? power (voltage independent) load” is even simpler—it’s a vertical line on theP-Vcurve. Section 2.7 describes these ideas further. First, let’s expand on impedance loads. A basic network theorem tells us that maximum power transmission occurs when the magnitude of the load impedance equals the magnitude ofthe source impedance. For higher load impedances (lower admittances), we are at high voltage, low current operating points. For higher admittances, we are at low voltage, high cur- rent operating points. Barbier and Barret provide the mathematical relations. For the simplest case of a resistance load and a reactance net- work, Figure 2-7 shows the relations of voltage, current, and power. As stated, maximum poweroccurs when the source and load impedance mag- nitudes are equal. We call the voltage at maximum power the critical volt- age. Example 2-2. For the simple thévenin system of Figure 2-7, find an expression for P = f(V). For unity power factor load, determine the maxi- mum power and the voltage at maximum power(critical voltage). Normal- izethevariables based on the short circuit power, E’/X, with: pated = ae mB Solution: The relations from Chapter 1 are rewritten in normalized form. P= BV sind, p = vsind Q= E=VcosFé vy? + q = veosé—v" Usingthe trigonometricidentity v*sin® 5+v?cos*6 = v?: p = v?-v*cos 6, or p = dv? (q+0%)” At unity power factor, p = ./v”—v‘; taking the derivative and setting itequal to zero, we get thecritical voltage and maximum power. ddvP _ 12)(gy ~4v9) = 0,20? = 1 2 *Aconstant powerstaticloadis non-physical andshould beused with cau- tion . 2.5 Introduction toVoltage Stability Analysis: P-V Curves 29 E ix Vv R F Prax 0.5 a a Tee 1+ (R/X)2 Po Prax 0.5 [1+ (R/X)*] 0 0 1 2 X/R 3 Critical Point Fig. 2-7. Relations of voltage, current, and power for resistance load and reactance network. J,, = E/X is short circuit current. P,,,, andV,,;, are calculated in Example 2-2.

Veit = 1/2 = 0.707 and Pyyg = /1/2-1/4 = 0.5 Also, at maximum power, 5 = sin (Prax/Verit) = 45°. For the case of resistive load, we can verify that maximum power occurs when the load resistance R equals the source reactanceX: p= PmaB® 0.5 (12Vex)"2 _ Venn _ V2 mx KX xk xX R Example 2-3. Repeat the previous problem with a purely reactive load. Calculate the “Voltage Collapse Proximity Indicator,” (VCPI = dQ,/dQ) 30 Chapter2,Whatis VoltageStability? where Q, is generated orsending endreactive powerandQ is load reactive power . Solution:P=0 and 6= 0. Therefore: EV Vv? One dQ_1i _ _ avFac 2V) = 0, Vai = E/2 9 wv vv mx = YF ¥ "Ky We again confirmed themaximum powertheorem. In normalized form: QmaxX Veit = 9-5, Umax = > = 0.25. Wecalculate thevoltage collapse proximity indicator(VCPI) as follows: Q, XQ; Bo Ee = Q+XP = a+ , Q- Feet ye =0 =_1[{EF?+2/E5? -42Q dQ, | 1 _ 1 qe fe fhe EB’ Qmax The voltage, V, goes from E at no load to E/2 at maximum load (Qimax): What about the VCPI? It goes from unity at no load to infinity at maximum load. Near maximum load, extremely large amounts ofreactive power are required at the sending end to support an incremental increase in load. The VCPI is thus a very sensitive indicator ofimpending voltage collapse. The related quantities, reactive reserve activation and reactive losses, are also sensitiveindicators. For the elementary model, Figure 2-8 shows the family ofnormalized P-Vcurves for different power factors. At more leading power factors the maximum power is higher(leading power factor is obtained by shunt com- pensation). The critical voltage is also higher, which is a very important aspectofvoltage stability. i 2.6 Introduction toVoltage StabilityAnalysis: V-Q Curves 31 E ix Vv P, Q = Ptang _V CFE tang = -0.75 12 tang = -0.5 1.0 tang = 0 0.6 Le 0.4 LeZA” ttaanngg == -0.02.525 ; 0.2 LA tang = 0.5 | Lagging PF tan@ = 0.75 p= PX 0 tang = 1.0 E? 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Fig. 2-8.

Normalized P-V curves for fixed (infinite) source and reac- tance network . Corresponding power factors for tan ¢ = 1.0, 0.75, 0.5, 0.25, and 0 are 0.707, 0.8, 0.894, 0.97, and 1.0. 26 Introduction to Voltage Stability Analysis: V-QCurves First, we can map the normalizedp-v curves shownon Figure 2-8 onto v-q curves. For constant values ofp, we note the q and v values (two pairs for each power factor), and then replot. Figure 2-9 shows the result. Again, the critical voltage is very high forhigh loadings (v is above 1 pu forp = 1 pu). The right side represents normal conditions where applying a capacitor bank raises voltage. The steep-sloped linear portions ofthe right sideofthe curves are equivalentto Figure 1-8 (rotate Figure 1-8 clockwise 90°). For large systems, the curves are obtained by a series of power flow simulations. V-Qcurves plotvoltage at atestorcritical busversusreactive power on the same bus.A fictitious synchronous condenser is represented at the test bus. In computer program parlance, the bus is converted to a “PVbus” without reactive power limits. Power flowis simulated fora series = 32 Chapter 2, Whatis Voltage Stability? = %&1X E 1.0. p= 10 0.8 0.6: p = 0.75 0.4: p=05 ff 0.2 p = 0.25 0 Vv 0.4 yy, van 06 0.8/7.0 1.2 1.4 -0.2 p=d Fig. 2-9. Normalized v-q curves for fixed (infinite) source and reactance network . Loads are constant power. of synchronous condenser voltage schedules, and the condenser reactive output is plottedversus scheduled voltage. Voltage is the independentvari- ableandisthe abscissa variable. Capacitive reactive poweris plottedinthe positive vertical direction. Without application ofshunt reactive compensa- tion at the test bus, the operating point is at the zero reactive point— correspondingto removal ofthe fictitious synchronouscondenser. (These curves are often termed Q-V rather than a V-Q curves, but the V-Q terminology stresses that voltage rather than reactive power load is the independent variable.

Q-Vcurves are produced by scheduling reactive loadrather than voltage.) V-Q curveshave several advantages: * Voltage security is closely related to reactive power, and a V-Q curve gives reactive power margin at the test bus. The reactive power margin is the MVAr distance from the operating pointto 2.6 Introduction toVoltage StabilityAnalysis: V-Q Curves 33 either the bottom ofthe curve, or to a point where the voltage squared characteristic ofan applied capacitor is tangent to the V-Qcurve(Figure 2-10). The testbuscouldbe representative of all busses in a “voltage control area” (an area where voltage magnitude changes arecoherent). * V-Q curves canbe computedat points along aP-Vcurve totest system robustness. ¢ Characteristics oftest bus shunt reactive compensation (capac- itor, SVC, or synchronous condenser) can be plotted directly on the V-Q curve. The operating point is the intersection of the V-Q system characteristic and the reactive compensation char- acteristic (Figure 2-10b). This is useful since reactive compen- sation is often a solution to voltage stability problems. ¢ The slope ofthe V-Q curve indicates thestiffness ofthetestbus (the AVfor a AQ). ¢ For more insight, the reactive power ofgenerators can be plot- ted on the same graph. When nearby generators reach their VAr limits, the slope ofthe V-Q curve becomes less steep and thebottomofthe curve is approached. Q Q an ae : Operatin: . "point 9 T T Shunt capacitor . Operating banks, peacwve Point margin wan ‘ (a) (b) Fig. 2-10. Reactive power margins. From a computation viewpoint, the artificial PV bus minimizes power flow divergence problems. Solutions can be obtained on the left side ofthe curve—divergence only occurs when voltages at busses away from the PV bus are dragged down. Generation rescheduling needs are minimal since the only changes in real power are caused by changes in losses.

Starting — 34 Chapter 2, Whatis Voltage Stability? values from the previous solution at a slightly different scheduled voltage are used so that each power flow solution is fast. The process can be auto- mated sothat the entire curve is computed atone time. The effect ofvoltage sensitive loads, oroftap changingreaching limits, can be shown on V-Q curves. V-Q curves with voltage sensitive loads (i.e., prior to tap changing) will have much greater reactive power margins and much lower critical voltages. When tapchangers hitlimits, thecurves tend toflatten out rather than turn up onthe left side. These ideas are sketched on Figure 2-11. Q aa Operating T Constant Point power \ loads— 7 Vv Voltage\ Voltage sensitive sensitive loadsw/ loads tap changers on limit Fig. 2-11. V-Q curve sketches showing effect ofvoltage sensitive loads and tap changers on limit. V-Q curves are presently the workhorse method of voltage stability analysis at many utilities. Since the method artificially stresses a single bus, conclusions should be confirmed bymore realistic methods. 2.7 Graphical Explanation of Longer-Term Voltage Stability Using P-V curves, we examine voltage stability as related to load charac- teristics. Weinclude the effects oftap changing, constant energyloads, and generator current limiting. Figure 2-12 shows a conceptual system model. Over a voltage range of about 0.9-1.1 per unit, we approximate induction motor load as constant power static load and assume motor reactive power demand is matched by shunt compensation. Different proportions of constant and resistive load are assumed. (Over a small voltage range, other load components such as 2.7 Graphical Explanation ofLonger-Term Voltage Stability 35 y P Generation _ (M) and nS system G,; = n°G Fig. 2-12.

Conceptual model. lighting can be modeled as combinations of constant and resistive load.) The resistance (or conductance, G) is reflected to the transmission side of the LTC transformer by the square of the turns ratio, n. Typical tap changerrange is +10%. We examine two extremes of load composition. First, we assume the loadis 75% motor and25% resistive—this approximatesa load areathatis primarily industrial, or a load area that has large amount ofair condition- ing. Then we assume the load is 25% motor and 75% resistive—this approximates a load area with alarge amount ofelectric space heating. High proportion ofmotor load. Figure 2-13 shows three system charac- teristics, plus load characteristics forthe 75% motor load case. The operat- ing pointis an intersection ofthe system and load characteristics. The three system characteristics are: (1) pre-disturbance, (2) post- disturbance before generator current limiting, and (3) post-disturbance with current limiting on some generators [16,18]. Generator field current limiting in response tooverload is by overexcitation limiters orby operator intervention. Each system characteristic has a maximum power point rep- resenting the steady-state power transfer capability ofthe generation and transmission system. The system characteristics are purely conceptual. Also shown on Figure 2-13 are load characteristics for the 75% motor loadcase. Twoload characteristics are shown: theinitial load characteristic and the characteristic with +10% tap changing. The load equation is P = 0.75+0.25n*GV*. Following the disturbance, the voltage will drop and the load characteristic will intersect one of the post-disturbance system characteristics. The drop in voltage will reduce the resistive load until tap changer regulation of the low side voltage. If there is no tap changing, oriftapchangers are atlimits, loadconductance will increase for thermostatically-controlled loads or for other constant energy diversified loads.

Load characteristic: P = 0.25+0.75n°GV*. Load curve a is for n = 1; Curve b is for n = 1.1. Curve cis for20% moreconductance (G = 1.2) and n = 1.1. thermostatic regulation, the load will notincrease above the initial one per unitvalue(vertical line). Without generator current limiting, the post-disturbance operating point is attheintersection ofthe vertical line and the post-disturbance sys- temcharacteristic. The load isfully restored andthetap ratio, n, is approx- imately 1.03. With current limiting but without added conductance, the operating point is at the intersection ofcurve b and the gray curve. With the added conductance, the operating point is PointA. The load characteristics are more favorable and loss ofoperating point (loss ofintersection) causing voltage collapse is unlikely. Stabilization at abnormally low voltage on the underside ofthe P-Vcurve is possible. In a realistic system, the outcome would depend on motor performance (includ- ing stalling or disconnection), protective relaying operations, and the amount of automatic or manually regulated constant energy load. If the operating point is on the underside side ofaP-Vcurve, an increase in load conductance results in a reduction ofload power. As described inAppendix F, power systems have actually stably operated at abnormally low voltage during a partial voltage collapse (Figure F-1). — 38 Chapter2, Whatis Voltage Stability? i Load curve b intersects the system characteristic with generator cur- rent limiting at its nose. Additional tap changing would decrease load power. This means the tap changing is lowering, rather than increasing, load-side voltage. This could becalled tap changerinstability. Hi A further point: Assume that the system is operating at Point A with taps at their limits and with added conductance due to thermostats.

On Figure 2-14, we can note that restoring the original system (say by line reclosing) will result in temporary operation at Point B with higher than initial power and possible overvoltage at the load side of tap changers. (This assumes that generator voltage regulators immediately respond to high voltage. This is true for continuously acting overexcitation limiters thatdonottrip regulators tomanual.) Effect ofshunt capacitor bank switching. Referring to the family of P-Vcurves fordifferent power factors shown onFigure 2-8, we can analyze the effect ofswitching on a capacitor bank while on the bottom side ofa P-Vcurve. For the 75% resistive case, Figure 2-15 shows that inserting a capacitor bank moves the operating point from Point Ato Point B. Voltage and power are both increased. The voltage/reactive power performance is normal. Similar behavior is shown in Chapter 4 for induction motor loads (Example 4-4). Both the stable operation on the bottom side of a P-V curve and the capacitor switching effects have been verified by time domain simulation . Pal andVan Cutsem describe some ofthese effects with math- ematical rigor. 2.8 Summary We have described two types ofvoltage stability: transient voltage stability and longer-term voltage stability. Longer-term voltage stability involving loads that are inherently voltage sensitive has been ofgreatest interest in recentyears. . Voltage stability involves the load, transmission, and generation sub- systems oflarge power systems. Three key aspects ofvoltage stability are: 1. theload characteristics as seen fromthebulkpowernetwork; 2. theavailable means for voltage control atgenerators and in the network; and 3. the ability ofthe network to transfer power, particularly reac- tive power, from the point of production to the point of con- sumption. Voltage instability and collapse is a dynamic phenomena and normally a large disturbance phenomena.

The network steady-state loadability limit References 39 1.2 Post-disturbance 1 system characteristic with generator €08 current limiting A 57 ® a Be \ > Post-disturbance _ £ system characteristic $0.4 withgenerator current limiting and shunt capacitor bank 0.2 insertion 0 0 0.5 1 1.5 Power - perunit Fig. 2-15. Effect ofcapacitor bank insertion on bottom side ofP-V curve with highly voltage sensitive load. Load characteristic same as curve c of Figure 2-14. (maximum powerpointonaP-Vcurve) isnotnecessarily the voltage insta- bility limit. Nevertheless, static, power flow based analysis of the post- disturbance steady-state is often a useful method of analysis for longer- term voltage stability. In later chapters we analyze voltage stability in more depth. First, however, weexamine the characteristics ofthevarious equipment influenc- ingvoltage stability. References 1. CIGREWorking Group 38.01, “Planning Against VoltageCollapse,” Electra,pp. 55-75, March 1987. 2. B. M. Weedy, Electric Power Systems, Third Edition Revised, John Wiley & Sons, 1987 (earliereditions 1967, 1972, and 1979). 3. CIGRE TaskForce 38-02-10, Modelling ofVoltage Collapse IncludingDynamic Phenomena, 1993. 4. D. J. Hill, Per-Anders Léf, and G. Andersson, “Analysis ofLong-Term Voltage Stability,” Tenth Power System Computing Conference, pp. 1252-1259, Graz Austria, 1990. 40 Chapter2, What isVoltage Stability? 5. IEEE Committee Report, “Proposed Terms and Definitions for Power System Stability,” JEEE Transactions on PowerApparatus andSystems, Vol. PAS-101, No. 7, pp. 1894-1898,July 1982. 6. M. K. Pal, “Voltage Stability Conditions Considering Load Characteristics,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 243-249, February 1992. 7. T. Van Cutsem, “Dynamic and StaticAspects ofVoltage Collapse,”Proceedings: Bulk Power System Voltage Phenomena—Voltage Stability and Security, EPRI EL-6183, pp. 6-55-6-79,January 1989. 8. Y.

Tamura, “AScenario ofVoltage Collapse in a Power System with Induction Motor Loads with a Cascaded Transition of Bifurcations,” Proceedings: Bulk PowerSystem VoltagePhenomena II:VoltageStabilityandSecurity,DeepCreek Lake, Maryland, pp. 143-146,4~7August 1991. 9. IEEE Committee Report, VoltageStability ofPowerSystems: Concepts,Analyti- cal Tools, andIndustry Experience, IEEE publication 90TH0358-2-PWR. 10. E. S. Cate, K.Hemmaplardh, J. W. Manke, and D. P. Gelopulos, “Time Frame Notion and Time Response ofthe Models in Transient, Mid-Term and Long- Term Stability Programs,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Sys- tems, Vol. PAS-103, No. 1, pp. 143-151,January 1984. 11. C. W. Taylor, “Concepts ofUndervoltage Load Shedding for Voltage Stability,” IEEE TransactionsonPowerDelivery,Vol. 7,No. 2, pp. 480-488,April 1992. 12. H. K.Clark, “VoltageStability:Criteria, PlanningTools, Load Modeling,”EPRY/ NERC Forumon Operational andPlanningAspectsofVoltage Stability,Breck- enridge, Colorado, 14-15September 1992. 13. D. McInnis, “South Florida Blackout,” unpublished Florida Power & Light report. 14. CIGRE Working Group14-07 and IEEE Working Group15.05.05, Guide for PlanningDCLinks Terminating atAC Systems Locations Having Low Short- CircuitCapacities, PartI:AC/DCInteraction Phenomena, CIGRE, June 1992. 15. M. K. Pal, discussion of“An Investigation ofVoltage Instability Problems,” by N. Yorino et al., IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 600-611, May 1992. 16. C. Barbier and J.-P. Barret, “Analysis ofPhenomena ofVoltage Collapse on a Transmission System,”RevueGeneraledel’electricite,Vol. 89,October 1980, pp. 672-690. 17. J. Carpentier, R. Girard, and E. Scano, “Voltage Collapse Proximity Indicators Computed from an Optimal Power Flow,” Proceedings ofthe8thPower System ComputingConference, pp. 671-678, Helsinki, 1984. 18. T.

Van Custsem, “Voltage Collapse Mechanisms: A Case Study,” Proceedings: Bulk Power System VoltagePhenomena II: Voltage Stability andSecurity, Deep CreekLake, Maryland,pp. 85-101, 4~7August 1991. 19. R. J. Thomas and A. Tiranuchit, “Dynamic Voltage Instability,” Proceedings of the26th Conference onDecisionandControl, LosAngeles, pp. 53-58, December 1987. 20. C. W. Taylor, “A Conceptual Analysis ofVoltage Stability as Related to Load Characteristics,” Survey ofVoltage Collapse Phenomena, NorthAmerican Elec- tric Reliability Council, 1991. f Transmi.ssi. on System Reacti. ve Power Compensation and Control It’s whatyou learn afteryou know it all that counts. JohnWooden* Reactive power compensation is often the most effective way to improve both power transfer capability and voltage stability. In this chapter we describe transmission system compensation; in the next chapter we describe distribution system compensation. Reactive power compensation can be divided into series andshunt com- pensation. It can also be divided into active and passive compensation; active compensation means a feedback control system regulates voltage or othervariables. Common forms ofreactive compensation are series capaci- tor banks, shunt reactors and capacitor banks, and static var compensa- tors. Under-load transformer tap changing also provides voltage/reactive powercontrol. First we reviewtransmission line characteristics. 34 Transmission System Characteristics Chapter 1 introduced the characteristics of reactive power transmission. Whena long line isheavily loaded, reactive power cannot transmitted even with large voltage gradients. Now we probe deeper and answer some ques- tions. Why and when are transmission lines compensated? What parame- ters need compensation? How do transmission line parameters vary with voltage class and line design? When should compensation be controlled? Bulk power transmission is generally at 230-kV and higher voltages.

Voltages above 230-kV are termed extra high voltage (EHV). Bulk power transmission lines are often quite long and are heavily loaded during peak *John Wooden wasa verysuccessful basketball coach attheUniversity of California at LosAngeles. a 42 Chapter3, Reactive Power Compensation and Control loads. They maybe lightly loaded offpeak. Twoofthecharacteristics ofEHV overhead transmission lines are low losses and multiple subconductors per phase(bundled conductors). A fundamental aspect of reactive power compensation and control is reactive power balance. Transmission lines both produce and consume reac- tive power, and the net values must be either absorbed or generated by the system at each line terminal. Transmission line shunt capacitance (or “charging”) produces reactive power proportional to the square ofthe volt- age. Since the voltage must be kept within about +5% of nominal voltage, the reactive power production is relatively constant. Transmission line series inductance consumes reactive power proportional to the square ofthe current. Since the current varies from heavy load periods to light load peri- ods, the transmission line reactive consumption varies. Therefore the net transmission line reactive power varies overthe load cycle. We can state: transmission line production = V”B (relatively constant), transmission line consumption = IX (variable). B = @C is the line shunt susceptance and X = lL is the line series reactance. Surge impedance loading. We are often interested in the loading where production equals consumption. This is called the natural or surge imped- ance loading. For an incremental length ofline ofreactance x and suscep- tance b, we set Vb = I’x, and solve for the surge or characteristic impedance: 2-- fF - ft (3.1) Vv x l The natural orsurge impedance loading is then: Py= v2 Z, (3.2) Surge impedance loading is, in many respects, the ideal loading.

Not only is reactive power production equal to reactive power consumption, but the voltage and current profiles are uniform along the line. The uniform (flat)voltage profile is especially desirable since voltagecan be held nearthe maximum value. The voltages and currents are also in phase at every point along theline. Long lines cannot be loaded much above the uncompensated surge impedance loading. References 1 and 2 developa “loadability curve” shown 3.1 Transmission System Characteristics 43 onFigure3-1. Toinsure small disturbance angle stability and forother rea- sons, lines longerthan about 450 km need tobe compensated. We will discuss several other reasons for compensation. But first we will review transmissionline parameters. 3 Nocompensation, 4 small disturbance stability Bo margin = 30% S 3 a 1 3 a 0 0 200 400 600 800 1000 Line Length - km Fig. 3-1. Loadability curve . Voltage drop limits loadability for lines shorter than 320 km(200miles). For longer lines, small disturbance stabil- ity margins limit loadability. Transmission line parameters. Let’s review some basics. The most important parameters are series resistance and reactance, and shunt sus- ceptance. Series resistance affects losses and loadability (thermal and sag limits). Resistance ofhigh voltage and EHV lines is small, however, and canoftenbeignored. For EHVlines,positive sequenceX/Rratios are 10-20. An equation for inductive reactance is : x a 4 GMD = ol =210™In GMR Q/km (3.3) where @ is the powersystem radian frequency. GMDis the geometric mean distance between phases: GMD = (d,, +d,, +d,,) 3. GMR is the geo- metric mean radius and can be obtained from conductor tables; GMR=0.8r where ris the conductor radius.

Forbundled conductors(several subconductors perphase)withspacing sbetween adjacent subconductors, the equivalent GMR is : a 44 Chapter 3, Reactive PowerCompensation and Control GMReyaqyuiyy = [[n2*xGMR{[—z*a|man] n-1]1/n G34.4) Fortwo and three conductor bundles, theequivalent GMRs are: Two conductors Js xGMR Three conductors 3/s* xGMR. To reduce the reactance, we must reduce the phase spacing (GMD) and/or increase the equivalent GMR. GMD is reduced by compact design and delta phase configuration. GMR,,,,,, is reduced mainly by increasing the numberofsubconductors; forexample, 500-kV lines are built with two, three, andfour subconductors per phase. Acorresponding equation for shunt susceptance is : b o10* = we = —18——G—M_D S/km(siemens/km) (3.5) In——— r Forbundledconductors: equiv = [>xr[ seso |n-b|l/n (3.6) The chargingreactive poweris: Quang = VO (3.7) Reduced phase spacing and bundled conductors reduce line inductance and reactance, and increases line capacitance and susceptance. This increases the surge impedance loading (Equations 3.1 and 3.2) and effec- tive transmission capability. The increased reactive power generation due to higher capacitance causes problems at light loads, and long EHV lines usually need shunt reactor compensation. The reactors are sometimes switchedoffduring heavy load. Although bundled subconductors substantially increases the equiva- lentradius ofphase conductors, the decrease in reactance and the increase in susceptance are modest because of the logarithmic functions in Equa- tions3.3 and 3.5. Figure 3-2 shows a high capacity, double-circuit 500-kV transmission line using three subconductors perphase. Example 3-1. A500-kV line has phase conductors in a delta configuration with 9.4 meter spacing. The conductor radius is 2.54 cm (1 inch), and the 3.1 Transmission System Characteristics 45 eS ae Fig. 3-2. 500-kV double-circuit transmission line. Bonneville PowerAdmin- istration. GMR is 2.03 cm.

Spacing between subconductors is 45.72 cm (18 inches). Frequency is 60 Hz. Compare the inductive reactance, charging reactive power, surge impedance, and surge impedance loading for one, two, three, and four conductors per phase. For the charging power and the surge impedance loadingcalculation, use 525 kV average operating voltage. Solution: Using Equations 3.1 through 3.4 the calculations are straight-forward. Table 3-1 summarizes the results. Compared with two subconductors, four subconductors increases surge impedance loading by 23%. This is equivalent to 33% uniformly distributed series compensation (Equation 3.8). Transmission line theory. Lines longer than about 400 km require special analysis. Starting with a distributed parameter model, the “wave equation” is solved forvoltages and currents along atransmission line. For sinusoidal steady-state analysis, we eliminate the time parameter and are left with equations as a function ofdistance. For lossless lines, Miller — 46 Chapter 3, Reactive PowerCompensation andControl covers the subjectvery well. Figure3-3 shows atransmission line model for a lossless line. Table 3-1 Gag MVAn i [es For lines shorter than about 200 km, small angle approximations can be made for the trigonometric corrections terms. The correction terms are then unity and the well-known lumped parameter pi model results. For power flow and stability computer programs, longer lines can be broken into lumped parameter sections of about 150-200 km. This is an alterna- tive to use of the correction terms. For lossy lines the correction terms involvehyperbolic functions. xsin@ C) Btan@/2 | Btan0/2 | 2 0/2 T T 2 0/2 | Fig. 3-3. Pi transmission line model with long-line correction terms. X=ax ' and B = ab, wherea is line length, and x andb are reactance and suscep- | tanceperunitlength. @is line lengthand equals aJxbradians. Example 3-2.

A 200 km Bonneville Power Administration 500-kV line (3- 1192MCMBuntingconductors) hasparametersx=0.32 Q/km andb = 5.02 uS/km. Calculate the correction terms for the equivalent circuit ofFigure 3-1. Solution: 6 = aJxb = 0.253 radians = 14.5°, then sind tan0/2 ; > 0.991 and wr = 1.0057 3.1 Transmission System Characteristics 47 Both correction terms are close to unity. As an exercise, repeat the cal- culations for a 400 km line. Compare the resulting models with the series combination oftwo 200 km lines (use ABCD generalized circuit constants tocalculate the series equivalent). Example 3-3. Very long lines require distributed parameter analysis. For the line parameters of Example 3-3, calculate the voltage at the open receiving end ofa quarter-wavelength line. Solution: The wavelength for 60 Hz is: @=axb =2n or a = 2n/xb = 4957 km. A quarter-wavelength is 1239 km or 770 miles. The following equation for voltage can be derived : V, = V,cos@+jZoI,sin@. Since the receiving end is open, J, = 0 and V, = V,/cos@. V, approaches infinity as @ approaches 90°! Obviously, shuntreactors areneeded on very longlines. Power system engineers are well-advised to memorize Equations 3.1, 3.2, and 3.7, plus typical parameters of several classes of transmission lines. Combinations of inductive reactance per unit length, surge imped- ance, surge impedance loading, and charging power should be immediately availableforquick calculations. Table 3-2 suggests values to bememorized. Susceptance and charging power can be calculated knowing inductive reactance and surge impedance. Using Table 3-2, we can calculate thatb = 5.12 uS/km for a three subconductor line. At 500-kV, the surge impedance loading is 5007/250 or 1000 MW. The charging reactive power is about 1.3 MVAr/km, orabout 2 MVAr/mile. Table 3-2 ia) ee Cables. Cable parameters are very different. Because ofthe close spacing, inductive reactance is lower and capacitance is higher.

A345-kV cable has inductive reactance of 0.09-0.16 Q/km (0.15-0.26 Q/mile) and charging reactive power ofabout 12 MVAr/km (20 MVAr/mile). Because ofthe high charging power, a key parameter ofcables is the critical length, defined as thelength at which the charging power equals the cable thermal capacity. ForEHVcables, the critical length maybe around25 km. .—_—— 48 Chapter3, Reactive Power Compensation andControl 3.2 Series Capacitors Series capacitor compensation has traditionally been associated with long transmission lines and with improving transient stability. Nowadays, how- ever, series capacitors are also applied on shorter lines to improve voltage stability. | Series compensation reduces net transmission line inductivereactance. | The reactive generation (I’x.) compensates for the reactive consumption (?X) of the transmission line. Series capacitor reactive generation increases with the current squared, thus generating reactive power when most needed. This instantaneous, inherent selfregulation is very valuable. Because of the self regulation, series compensation should be compared with active shunt compensation (static var compensators) rather than pas- sive shunt capacitor banks. At light load, series capacitors have little effect. Shunt reactors are needed forlonglines. Series capacitor equipment is mounted ona platform at line potential and includes the capacitors, spark gap protection, metal-oxide varistor (MOV), bypass switch, and control and protection. References 4-8 cover many aspects of series capacitor engineering. References 9-11 describe recent installations. References 12-14 cover the important subject of subsynchronous resonance. We concentrate on aspects closely related to voltage stability and recommend Miller for discussions ofreactive com- pensation related to very longlines and angle stability.

Standards allow overload current(capacitorovervoltage) of135%forthirty minutes and 150%forfive minutes. In voltage emergencies, the time-overload capability allows time for operators to reschedule generation, bring gas turbines on line, or shed load. ° Example 3-4. For two series compensated parallel lines, calculate the MVArratings required for outage ofone parallel line.Allow 150% voltage/- currentoverload fora short period. Solution : The capacitor bank must withstand twice normal voltage and current. Therefore (rated current) x (1.5 per unit) equals 2 per unit, and rated current equals 1.33 per unit of normal full load current. The bankMVArrating must beincreased bya factor of 1.33” or 1.78. Forexam- .—_— 3,Reactive Power Compensation and Control 50 Chapter 7 eee SS oe EH ri Wigan Hei - nS i | - \ r Sa ot Ww. Fig. 3-5. Overhead view of500-kV series capacitor platforms. General Elec- tric Company. ple, a capacitor bank with normal full load current of1500 amperes would be rated 2000 amperes. Another difficulty with series compensation is voltage profile during heavy load conditions accompanied by transmission outages. The voltage on one or the other side ofthe series capacitor will probably be too high. These very high current conditions are expected during voltage emergen- cies. Furthermore, transmission voltages should bekept as high as possible to minimize reactive losses (Equation 1.11). The phasor diagrams ofFigure 8-6 show the problem; for the high current condition, we must somehow control the voltage-current power factor angles. Solutions involve smaller amounts ofseries compensation at a particular location andjudicious use ofshuntreactors. Series capacitors can benormally bypassed butrapidlyinserted follow- inglargedisturbances. This practice has been used on the northern partof the PacificAC Intertieformanyyears .

Voltage stability can beimproved if, owing to the bypassed series capacitors, more shunt capacitors are applied, keepinggenerator power factor close to unity. | | | 3.3 ShuntCapacitor Banks and Shunt Reactors 51 I — Vv; Vy | @ | I I Va Vy ~~ }:Ix -jIX Vv, Vv; (b) V, OK (c) V, too high Fig. 3-6. Series capacitor voltages. Series compensation has often been found tobe cost-effective compared to shunt (SVC) compensation. Series compensation has, however, some- times been dismissed because ofunfamiliarity—and because ofexcessive concern over subsynchronous resonance. Subsynchronous resonance is often not a major problem, and low cost countermeasures and protective measures maybe applicable. 3.3 Shunt Capacitor Banks and Shunt Reactors Shunt capacitor banks are always bus, rather than line, connected. Shunt reactors may be either line connected or bus connected (often on the ter- tiarywindings ofautotransformers). The primary purposes oftransmission system shunt compensation near load areas are voltage control and load stabilization. Mechanically-switched shunt capacitor banks (MSCs) are installed at majorsubstations inloadareas. Inthischapter, weconsiderapplications at transmission voltages, and on tertiaries of large autotransformers. The switching is often done manually, with voltage relay backup switching whenvoltages are out-of-range. Figure 3-7 shows a 523.9-kV, 342 MVAr capacitor bank at the Raver 500-kVswitchingstationnearSeattle. For voltage stability, shuntcapacitor banks are very useful in allowing nearbygenerators tooperate near unity powerfactor. This maximizes fast- actingreactive reserve. For voltage emergencies, the obvious shortcoming of shunt capacitor banks is that the reactive power output drops with the voltage squared. Thisis in stark contrast to the selfregulating nature ofseries capacitors. .—— ‘N 52 Chapter 3, Reactive Power Compensation and Control wo.

FA all - a FS = 2 oe a alt ee: oe gl il” amet lee * ote a wesa eek, | 2 am mie r 4 i i | - “ ae) J ° mm Fig. 3-7. 500-kV mechanically switched shunt capacitor bank. The wye- grounded bank is rated 523.9-kV, 342 MVAR, and consists of 20 parallel capacitors per group and 38 series groups. Each capacitor is 7.96-kV, 150- kVAr. Bonneville PowerAdministration. | Compared to static var compensators, mechanically switched capacitor banks have the advantage of much lower cost. Switching speeds can be quite fast. (Circuit breakers withfive-cycle close, three-cycle open times are used .) Current limiting reactors minimize switching transients. The control, however, must minimize switching duty; this calls for generous deadbands (hysteresis) in voltage relay logic. Precise, rapid control ofvolt- age is not possible. Following a transmission line outage, capacitor bank energization should be delayed to allow time for line reclosing. However, capacitor switching should be before significant amounts of load are restored by transformer tap changers ordistribution voltage regulators. For the Pacific Intertie system, references 15 and 16 describe applica- | tion of500-kV switched capacitor banks to improve voltage stability. The | capacitor banks are inserted by direct detection of monopolar or bipolar | outages ofthe parallel Pacific HVDC Intertie. References 17-20 describe recent application of voltage-controlled MSCs to improve voltage stability. Nowadays, microprocessors are pre- ferred forthe voltage control and switching logic. | 3.4 StaticVar Systems 53 There are several disadvantages to mechanically switched capacitors. For transient voltage instability, the switching may not be fast enough to prevent induction motor stalling. If voltage collapse results in a system breakup, the stable parts ofthe system mayexperience damagingovervolt- ages immediately following separation. Overvoltages would be aggravated by energizing ofshunt capacitors duringthe period ofvoltage decay.

Generally, our discussion of shunt capacitor banks also applies to switchable shunt reactors. Because ofovervoltage concerns, shunt reactors are likelier than capacitors to be applied on the tertiaries oflarge network autotransformers. 3.4 StaticVar Systems Static var compensators overcome the above-mentioned limitations of mechanically switched shunt capacitors and reactors. Advantages include fast, precise regulation ofvoltage and unrestricted, largely transient-free, capacitor bank switching. Voltage is regulated according to a slope (droop) characteristic. The slope is related tothe steady state gain and is generally 1-5% over the control range. At the boost limit, the SVC becomes a shunt capacitorbank. What are static var compensators and systems? CIGRE distin- guishes between static var compensators and static var systems. A static var system is a static var compensator with the compensator also control- ling mechanical switching ofshunt capacitor banks or reactors. Figure 3-8 shows a static var system schematic. The compensator may include thyris- tor controlled reactors (TCR), thyristor switched capacitors (TSC), and harmonic filters. The harmonic filters (for the TCR-produced harmonics) are capacitive atfundamental frequency and are 10-30% ofthe TCR MVAr size. ATCR, ifused, is typically slightly larger than the TSC blocks so that continuous control is realized. Other possibilities are fixed capacitors (FC), and thyristor switched reactors (TSR). Usually a dedicated transformer is used with the compensator equipment at medium voltage (8-25 kV). Figure 3-9 shows the outdoor portion of a thyristor controlled reactor. Figure 3-10 shows theoutdoor portion ofthyristor switched capacitor. As with series capacitors, most design aspects of static compensators are beyond our scope. We recommend references 4 and 21-25. Most discus- sions ofpower system (as opposed to industrial) applications ofSVCs deal withlongtransmission lines andimprovement inanglestability.

Long lines are supported at intermediate locations by compensators which regulate the bus voltage. Each transmission segment becomes largely independent ofthe others, andoverall steady-state angles greater than 90° are possible. Miller terms this “compensation by sectioning.” — NX 54 Chapter 3, Reactive Power Compensation andControl LI Ld Ld HV bus a LJ] MSC vy" T MV bus LoL €eeee [= Filters T T | svc TCR Aux. Vig TSC TSC signal Fig. 3-8. Schematic oftypical static varsystem. We, however, are interested in SVCs in load areas. For preventingtran- sientvoltage instability associated with concentrations ofmotors, SVCs are more effective than breaker switched capacitors [4 (pages 170-172),26]. Chapter 6 provides a simulation example. For slower forms ofvoltage stability, the rapid response ofSVCs is not as critical—except in controlling overvoltages following breakups. Over- voltages may be due to load shedding (ac contactor release) and capacitor bank energization during the voltage decay. The close regulation ofvoltage by SVCs is valuable in keeping “under the voltage.” (The term “keeping under the voltage” means preventing the voltage from ever getting below normal. Low voltage means that line charging is reduced, and reactive losses are increased. Switching in a capacitor during low voltage results in less than full capacitor output. Recovering to normal voltage without shedding load maybe difficult.) During normal conditions, SVCs should be operated with inductive or floating output so that rapid capacitive boost is available for disturbances. (Considering losses, floatingoutput favors a TCR-TSC compensator over a TCR-FC compensator.) To achieve capacitive reserve, the SVC can order mechanical switching ofnearby shunt capacitor banks and shunt reactors. A reactive power or susceptance regulator may also be used to main- tain the desired output during steady-state conditions, allowing voltage to vary with a deadband of several percent.

Example 3-5. Figure 3-13 shows, conceptually, V-Q characteristics for both constant and voltage sensitive loads. The initial post-disturbance sys- tem characteristic is for voltage sensitive loads. The final post-disturbance characteristic is after tap changing has restored load to pre-disturbance levels. Immediately following the disturbance, the operating point is at a very low voltage. Since the final constant power characteristic does not intersect the Q = 0 axis, the load restoration by tap changing causes col- lapse. Voltage stability can be maintained bya static varsystem. Figure 3-14 shows SVC and mechanically switched capacitor characteristics superim- posed onthe system V-Q characteristics. The SVC characteristic shown on Figure 3-11 is simply rotated 90° clockwise. The SVC slope can be set to achieve a desired minimum voltage (V,,;,). Some reactive reserve is required. Before loadrestoration, aMSC mustbe energized tobias the SVC to intersect with the constant power characteristic—again with reserve margin. The mechanical switching can be directed by the static compensa- torcontrols. SVC Modeling. References 21, 28, and 29 describe models for power flow and dynamic simulations. Reference 30 provides a good description of controls and models fora recent installation. 3.4 Static Var Systems 57 Steady-state v characteristic. Dynamic characteristic Q Qmax TE Qe Qnin YY Fig. 3-11. SVC high-voltage side voltage/reactive power characteristic with reactive power orsusceptance regulator. Pre-disturbance Vv system characteristic. 1 Post-disturbance system characteristic Q AE max Qeet Qnin AVY Fig. 3-12. SVC reactive power control. The SVC moves alongdynamic char- acteristic from point 1 to point 2 immediately following a disturbance.

Reactive power output then slowly moves to point 3 to reestablish reactive reserve andallow othercontrolsto raise the system characteristic. a 58 Chapter 3, Reactive Power Compensation and Control Q a Final post-disturbance V—Qcharacteristic Initial post-disturbance V-Qcharacteristic Initial post-disturbance Pre-disturbance _ operating point V-Qcharacteristic Vv Pre-disturbance operating point Fig. 3-13. Pre- and post-disturbance V-Q characteristics. At the lower volt- ages, the final post-disturbance V-Q characteristic has tap changers at limit and generator current limiting. Q Final post-disturbance 7 V-Qcharacteristic 4 SVC reserve Initial post-disturbance V-Qcharacteristic . SVC + Switched SVC capacitor bani atboost limit Pre-disturbance V-Qcharacteristic v Vain Fig. 3-14. Static var system (SVC and MSC) for stabilization. 3.5 Comparisons between Series andShunt Compensation 59 For specialized study of voltage control, such as for coordination of reactive power compensation, power flow simulation should include slope or droop representation. The slope can be modeled by connecting the SVC toanauxiliarybus separated from the SVC high voltage busbyareactance equal to the per unit slope . The auxiliary bus is a PV bus controlling the voltage at the SVC high voltage bus. The SVC should becomea capaci- tor at its boost limit; with older power flow programs this can be achieved byrepresenting a thyristor controlled reactor/fixed capacitor typeofSVC. Ifa reactive power or susceptance regulator is used, the SVC model in apower flow simulation mustcorrespond to the pointin time that is simu- lated. For dynamic simulation (small-signal analysis, transient stability, longer-term dynamics) relatively simple models usuallysuffice. Figure 3-15 shows the model structurefora typical SVC. 3.5 Comparisons between Series and Shunt Compensation Let’s compare series and shunt compensation.

Some seriescompensation advantages are: * Series capacitors are inherently self regulating; a control system is notneeded. ¢ For equivalent performance, series capacitors are often less costly than SVCs; losses arevery low. ¢ For voltage stability, series capacitors lower the critical or col- lapse voltage. ¢ Series capacitors have significant time-overload capability. * Series capacitors and switched series capacitors can be used to control loading ofparallel lines to minimize active and reactive losses. Some series compensation disadvantages are: * To reinforce an established grid, many parallel lines may have to be series compensated. ¢ Series capacitors are line connected; compensation is removed foroutages, and capacitors in parallel lines maybe overloaded. ¢ During heavy loading (outages ofparallel lines), the voltage on one side ofthe seriescapacitormay be out-of-range. ¢ Shuntreactors may be needed for light loadcompensation. ¢ Subsynchronous resonance may call for expensive countermea- sures. Some static varcompensator advantages are: .— 60 Chapter3, Reactive PowerCompensation andControl Measuring Transmission circuit voltage Slope I Measuring Vv. Damping] meas signal Viegref *=C) | rVoolutsaege, | © cTohnytrrioslto&r regulator interface Teve Susceptance 0 MSC To/from regulator + control capacitor banks Beet (a) General structure Brax ra “s_ + Bucs " Ks AVsp © Vena Brin + Berror >. Kp AVsrmin l+sTp (b) Proportional—integral voltage regulator (c) Susceptance regulator Fig. 3-15. Static var system model. The voltage regulator is often purely integral control. Thecurrent may be obtained by multiplication ofB,,- and Vineas: The susceptance regulator limits determine the voltage deadband.

Other signals may be active during disturbances to improve transient stability and transient damping. * SVCs provide direct control of voltage; this is very valuable when there islittle generation in the load area. ¢ The remaining capacitive capability of a SVC is a good indica- tionofproximity to voltage instability. ¢ SVCs provide rapidcontrol oftemporary overvoltages. 3.6 Synchronous Condensers 61 Some static varcompensator disadvantages are: ¢ SVCs have limited overload capability; a SVC is a capacitor bankat itsboost limit. * The critical orcollapse voltagebecomes the SVC-regulated volt- age; instability usually occurs once an SVC reaches its boost limit. * SVCs are expensive; shunt capacitor banks should firstbe used to allow unity power factor operation ofnearby generators. The best design in some cases may be a combination of series and shuntcompensation. In the early 1960s, E. C. Starr compared series and shunt compensa- tion. Figures 3-16 and 3-17 show some inherent properties on P-Vcurves. For switchable shunt compensation (nowadays achievable with thyristor switched capacitors), the critical voltage increases with more compensa- tion. Series compensation has the opposite property. We can provide some idea of present day compensation equipment costs. The data given below are to furnish and install equipment at an existing substation. Overhead costs areexcluded. 500-kV seriescapacitors: $2.8 million + $7.50/KVAr 500-kV shunt reactors: $18.3/kVAr 500-kVshunt capacitors: $1.3 million + $4.10/kVAr 230-kV shunt capacitors: $0.28 million + $4.10/kVAr Large SVC: $30-50/kVAr The fixed costofthe shuntcapacitors is circuitbreakercost. The range ofSVC costs is related to specific configuration and the complexity ofthe project.

All costs are subject to variation because of monetary exchange rates, level ofcompetition, special requirements, and other factors. 3.6 Synchronous Condensers Because ofhigher initial and operating costs, synchronous condensers are generally not competitive with static var compensators. The capital cost may be 20-30% higher than SVCs. The full-load losses ofcondensers (and generators) are around 1.5%, and the no-load losses (floating output) are around0.5%. Technically, synchronous condensers have some advantages over SVCs in voltage-weak networks. Following a drop in network voltage, the increase in condenser reactive power output is instantaneous (same for generator reactiveoutput). The subsequent decay ofinternal voltage orflux (armature reaction) is countered by excitation control. As discussed in a 62 Chapter 3, Reactive Power Compensation and Control Chapter 5, condensers and generators have tens of seconds of overload capability. In contrast to the voltage squared capacitor characteristic of SVCs atfull boost, condensers can maintain rated current atfull boost. 300 ‘80 140, 250 = 60 100——120. we240 kV o Capacitor Voltage \ s MVAr limits +990 kV Ke} 200 rating > izi 242 kV 150 eG some [sp £ or 2 100 unity pf_, o 2 T 50 0 0 100 200 300 400 500 Receiving End Power - Megawatts Fig. 3-16. Characteristics ofshunt compensation. 300 o Voltage . = 50% 3 limits — £ 200 220kV NSD 40% s Percent compensation 0% 10% 20% 30% no} ii 150 116 MVArfor40% 2 173 MVArfor 50% 2 100 So rc —4—| 50 242kV 200 miles 0 —H unity pf 0 100 200 300 400 500 | Receiving End Power - Megawatts 1 Fig. 3-17. Characteristics ofseries compensation. 3.7 Transmission Network LTC Transformers 63 For voltage stability improvement, Tokyo Electric Power Company has chosen synchronous condensers over static var compensators.

One reason | isthe lower criticalvoltage atthe maximum power point . : As a solution to voltage stability problems, generators (especially com- i bustion turbines) have been declutched to run as synchronous condensers j [17,32-34]. | Most synchronous condenser applications are now associated with high | voltage direct current(HVDC)installations. They are sometimes necessary | toincrease the network strength (short circuit capacity) and to improve (or | provide) commutation voltage. (To date, all HVDC systems use line- | commutated inverters.) Manitoba Hydro recently installed three +300/-165 MVaAr synchronous condensers at the Nelson River project inverter station | . The machines have 360 MVAr rating for temperatures below 20°C. | The companion book describes modeling ofsynchronous machines. | 3.7 Transmission Network LTCTransformers | Transmission network autotransformers with load tap changers pro- vide voltage and reactive power control. LTC transformers can be either manually or automatically controlled. Most North American LTC autotransformers are manually controlled. (Many NorthAmerican utilities purchase large autotransformers with fixed orno-load taps.) Tapchangers regulate the lowvoltage side. For example, automatic tap changing on 500/230-kV autotransformers would regulate the 230-kV volt- age. This supports capacitor banks and line charging on the lower voltage network, and reduces reactive power losses on the lower voltage network. Transmission system transformer tapchangingtimedelays should be short compared to the time delay fortap changing for bulk power delivery trans- formers and distribution voltage regulators. This will result in faster load restoration compared to fixed taptransformers ormanually controlled LTC transformers. The EHV-side voltages will sag because ofthe tap changing, resulting inhigher EHV network reactive losses.

To help prevent this, tap changing should becoordinated withswitchingoftransmission network shunt capac- itor banks and shunt reactors. One method is to switch shunt reactive devices rather than transformer taps ifthe disturbance lowers voltage on bothsidesofthe LTC autotransformer . Tap changing is further discussed in the next chapter in conjunction withsubtransmission and distribution networks. a 64 Chapter3, Reactive Power Compensation ar We have introduced aspects of transmission tive power compensation and control pertaining directly to ‘lity. Later chapters will build on this introduction. References 1. H.P. St. Clair, “Practical Concepts in Capability andofTransmis- sionLines,”AIEE Transactions, PartIIIPowerApparems, Vol. 72, pp. 1152-1157, December 1953. 2. R. D. Dunlop, R. Gutman, and P. P. Marchenko, “Aelopment of Loadability Characteristics for EHV and UHV Trines,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, No. 2, pp. 606-617, March/April 1979. 3. H. W. Dommel, Notes on Power System Analysis, Unitish Colum- bia, 1975. 4. T.J.E. Miller,editor, ReactivePowerControl inElectohnWiley & Sons, NewYork, 1982. 5. G. D. Breuer, H. M. Rustebakke, R.A. Gibley,andH. Jr.,“TheUse ofSeries Capacitors to Obtain Maximum EHVTransbility,”IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, ‘No. 11, pp. 1090-1101, November 1964. 6. F Tliceto, E. Cinieri, M. Cazzani, andG. SantagostinVoltages and Currentsin Series-Compensated EHV Lines,” Proceed. 123. No. 8, pp. 811-817,August 1976. 7. F Iliceto andE. Cinieri, “ComparativeAnalysis ofSetCompensa- tion Schemes for AC Transmission Systems,” IEEis on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-96, No. 6, pp. 181%nber/Decem- ber 1977. 8. E. W. Kimbark, “Improvement ofSystem Stability byries Capaci- tors,”IEEE Transactions onPowerApparatus andS)\S-85, No. 2, pp. 180-188,February 1966. 9. R. Allustiarti, H. Hoexter, P. Lai, J. Samuelsson, and R. G.

Rocamora, “Design and Operating Performance of]-Oxide-Pro- tected SeriesCapacitorBanks on theTable Mountain/EEE Trans- actionsonPowerDelivery, Vol. 3, No. 4,pp. 1951-19538. 10. J. M. Barcus, S.A. Miske, Jr.,A. P. Vitols, H. M. MayG. Peterson, “The Varistor Protected Series Capacitors at the 5tiew Substa- tion,”IEEE Transactions onPower Delivery, Vol. 3, N-1985, Octo- ber 1988. 11. G. E. Lee and D. L. Goldsworthy, “Equipment and BPA’s New IntertieSeries Capacitors,”ProceedingsoftheAmeriaference, Vol. 54-I,pp. 664-670, 1992. 12. IEEE Committee Report, Analysis and Control ofSs Resonance, IEEE 76CH1066-0-PWR, 1976. 13. IEEE Committee Report, Symposium on Countermeasynchronous Resonance, IEEE 81TH0086-9-PWR, 1981. 14. P. M.Anderson, B. L.Agrawal, andJ. E. Van Ness, SsResonance inPower Systems, IEEE Press, 1990. References 65 15. B. C. FurumasuandR. M.Hasibar, “DesignandInstallation of500-kVBack-to- BackShuntCapacitorBanks,”IEEETransactionsonPowerDelivery,Vol. 7,No. 2, pp. 539-545,April 1992. 16. W. Mittelstadt, C. Taylor, M. Klinger, J. Luini, J. McCalley, andJ. Mechenbier, Caltage Instability Modeling and Solutions as Applied to the Pacific Intertie,” CIGRE, paper38-230, 1990. 17. W. B. Jervis, J. G. P. Scott, and H. Griffiths, “Future Application ofReactive Compensation Plant on the CEGB System to Improve Transmission Network Capability,”Proceedingsof33rd CIGRESession, Vol. II,paper38-06, 1988. 18. I. M. Welch, P. H. Buxton, and D. S. Crisford, “Integration ofReactive Power Compensation Equipmentwithin Substations,” CIGRE, paper23-202, 1990. 19. G. N. Allen, V. E. Henner, and C. T. Popple, “Optimization ofStatic Var Com- pensators and SwitchedShuntCapacitorsina LongDistance Interconnection,” Proceedings of33rd CIGRESession, Vol. II,paper38-07, 1988. 20. S.Koishikawa, S. Ohsaka,M. Suzuki,T.

Michigami,andM.Akimoto,“Adaptive Control ofReactivePower SupplyEnhancing Voltage Stability of a Bulk Power Transmission System and a New Scheme of Monitor on Voltage Security,” CIGRE, paper38/39-01, 1990. 21. CIGREWG38-01,Static VarCompensators, CIGRE,Paris, 1986. 22. K. Hanson, Application Guidefor Static Var Compensators, Electricity Supply Board, Dublin, Ireland, 1985. 23. Canadian Electrical Association, Static Compensators forReactivePower Con- trol,CantextPublications, Winnipeg, 1984. 24, IEEE CommitteeReport,ApplicationofStatic VarSystemsforSystemDynamic Performance, IEEE 87TH0187-5-PWR, 1987. 25. D. L. Osborn, “Factors forPlanning a Static VAR System,” Electric Power Sys- temsResearch, 17(1989), pages 5-12. 26. A. E. Hammad andM. Z. El-Sadek, “Prevention ofTransient Voltage Instabili- ties due to Induction MotorLoads by Static VARCompensators,” IEEE Trans- actions onPowerSystems, Vol. 4,No. 3,pp. 1182-1190,August 1989. 21. CIGREWorkingGroup38.01, “PlanningAgainstVoltageCollapse,”Electra, pp. 55-75, March 1987. 28. P. Kundur,PowerSystemStability andControl, McGraw-Hill, 1993. 29, IEEESpecial Stability ControlsWorkingGroup,“StaticVarCompensatorMod- elsforPowerFlowandDynamic Performance Simulation,” paper93WM 173-5 PWRS, IEEE/PES 1993wintermeeting. 30. D. Dickmander, B. Thorvaldsson, G. Stromberg, D. Osborn, A. Poitras, and D. Fisher, “Control System Design and Performance Verification for the Chester, Maine Static Var Compensator,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 7, No. 3,pp. 1492-1503, July1992. 31. Y. Sekine, K. Takahashi, Y. Ichida, Y. Ohura, and N. Tsuchimori, “Method of Analysis andAssessment on Power System Voltage Phenomena, and Improve- ments Including Control Strategies for Greater Voltage Stability Margins,” CIGRE,paper38-206, 1992. 32. F. Iliceto, E. Einieri, F. Gatta, andA.

Erkan, “Optimal Use ofReactive Power Resources for Voltage Control in Long Distance EHV Transmission: Applica- tions to the Turkish 420-kV System,” Proceedings of33rdCIGRE Session, Vol. Il, paper 38-03, 1988. a 66 Chapter 3, Reactive PowerCompensation and Control 33. M. G. Dwek, Study Group 38 discussion, Proceedings of33rd CIGRE Session, Vol. II, 1988. 34. M. J. Lefrancois and J. C. McGough, “Highlights of the B.C. Hydro Burrard Generating Units Operating as Synchronous Condensers,” Proceedings ofthe AmericanPowerConference,April 1990. 35. C. V. Thio and J. B. Davies, “New Synchronous Compensators for the Nelson RiverHVDCSystem—PlanningRequirements andSpecification,” IEEE Trans- actionsonPowerDelivery,Vol. 6, No. 2, pp. 922-928,April 1991. Power System Loads God is in theDetails Ludwig MiesVan Der Rohe Voltage stability depends on the details—particularly the load characteris- tics. Inourcontext, loads include the subtransmissionand distribution net- works that connect consumers to the transmission networks and generation. To be expert in voltage stability analysis, we must understand the load characteristics and be able to model them. We must also under- standaspects ofdistribution system engineering. 41 Overview of Subtransmission and Distribution Networks , Subtransmission networks usually operate at voltages such as 69-kV, 115- kV, and 138-kV that are no longer considered “main-grid” and that may have many taps for load delivery. Large industrial customers are often served directly from the subtransmission (or even the transmission) networks. In some systems, the subtransmission may be radial from the main-grid, and in others there may be loop back to main-grid substations. The characteristics of subtransmission networks are not much different from the transmission networks described in Chapter 3. In this chapter we concentrate on distribution networks. A good reference on distribution system engineering is the book by Gonen .

Where feeders are ofdifferent length, the transformer tap changing regulator is often replaced with individual feeder tap chang- ing voltage regulators (essentially autotransformers). Line-drop compensa- tion, described in a later section is often used. Positive sequence X/R ratios are much smaller for overhead distribu- tion circuits than transmission circuits. X/R ratios less than unity are com- mon, particularlyon older circuits and on laterals. Arule ofthumb (related toasymmetrical faultcurrents)is thatX/R ratios should not exceed five . | Equations 1.1 through 1.4 no longer apply, and active and reactive power relations are more complex. The differences can be easily seen from voltage phasor diagrams (Figure 4-2). E <n E T —— in Vv T Vv IR LargeX/R ratio SmallX/R ratio transmission network transmission network Fig. 4-2. Phasor diagrams for high and lowX/R ratios. Hy 1 Long feeders, which generally serve residential or farm loads, may require additional voltage regulators, possibly with line-drop compensa- tion. Fixed and switched shunt capacitors can also be installed along the feeder to control voltage. Ifthe loads are uniformly distributed along the i feeder, fixed capacitors are about two-thirdsofthedistance to the endofthe feeder . Switched capacitors may be close to the end of the feeder. i Switched capacitors are now less expensive than regulators and have lower losses. They are increasingly used. i] _ 70 Chapter 4, Power System Loads Underground distribution, including underground residential distribu- tion (URD), is widely used. The cables have much lower reactance, higher XIR ratios, and higher capacitance. EPRI research on load modeling surveyed fortyutilities regarding load composition and distribution feeder characteristics, including feeder lengths and impedances . Based on data from three Texas utilities, the researchers developed the typical overhead residential feeder shown on Figure 4-3.

Feeders for commercial and industrial loads are generally shorter. 0.64km 3-phase laterals 2ASCR ikm 1.1km 1.1km 1.4.km 795 MCM 477 MCM 4/0AWG 4/0AWG Substation T T T T 10 MVA Fig. 4-3. Typical overhead residential feeder . Light industrial and com- mercial loadmay be served alongtrunk. For the circuit of Figure 4-3, sensitivity computations (power versus voltage for static load models without regulators) evaluated the effect of feeder impedance changes. Results were insensitive to lateral impedance changes. For winter load compositions, results were also insensitive to changes intrunk impedance (winter loads are highlyvoltage sensitive). For southern U.S. residential summer load compositions with 77% air condi- tioningand refrigeration load (compressor load), results were highly sensi- tive to trunk impedance changes—particularly for reactive power. Figure 4-4 shows the results. The increase in reactive power with voltage sag is obviously detrimental to voltage stability and is a characteristic ofmotors driving compressor loads. Compressor loads require nearly constant torque regardless ofmotor speed. 4.1 Overview ofSubtransmission and Distribution Networks 71 1.2 Real 1 power 1 2 P 5 3 208 3 & @ 1 Reactive 0-6 g power , S 8 a 2 ~ 0.4 3 a ®3 c 0.2 Curve 1 and 1': Typical residential feeder. Curve 2 and 2': Trunk impedance doubled. Curve 3 and 3': No feeder impedance. 0 0.8 0.9 1 11 1.2 Voltage - per unit Fig. 4-4. Effectoffeederimpedance on active and reactive power responses to substation voltage changes [2, Volume 3]. Residential feeder (Fig. 4-3) with large central air conditioning load. One per unit power equals 10 MVA. Other sensitivity cases showed that linearly increasing load (triangu- lar-shaped feeder configuration) is more severe than the uniformly distrib- uted load (rectangular-shaped feederconfiguration) ofFigure 4-4. Example 4-1. For a 12.47-kV, 10 MVAresidential feeder, compare per unit feeder impedance with the impedance ofthe transformers.

Solution: Base impedance for 12.47-kVand 10 MVAis 12.47/10 = 15.55 ohms. Typical feederimpedance maybe about0.5 Q/km or0.03 pu/km. The effective impedance of a 5 km feeder with uniformly distributed load is about 0.03 x 5/2 = 0.075 per unit. This compares with about 0.1 per unit and 0.03 per unit impedances for the bulk power delivery and distribution transformers, respectively. Total transformer and feederimpedance forres- idential feeders typicallymaybe around0.2 per unit. Summary. For voltage stability, we are especially interested in the charac- teristicsoflongerfeeders(residential andrural) thataddsignificant imped- a 72 Chapter4, Power System Loads ance between bulk power delivery transformers and loads. We have not discussed distribution networks formore concentrated loads. Distribution system engineering practices vary considerably from com- pany to company. Within a company, practices evolve over time, resulting in feeders havingdifferentcharacteristics. Several practices are important for voltage stability. Some utilities do not use LTC transformers or distribution voltage regulators, relying on voltage controlled capacitors. Other utilities use LTCs on both transmis- sion/subtransmission transformers and subtransmission/distribution transformers. Later in this chapter, we describe distribution reactive power compen- sation and voltage regulation in more detail. 4.2 Static and Dynamic Characteristics of Load Components We now describe the loads and their aggregated characteristics. Ofcritical importance is the voltage sensitivity of loads. (Although some loads are also frequency sensitive, voltage usually changes much more than frequency—even with electrical islanding.Also, frequency sensitivity isnot directly related to voltage stability.) The response ofloads to voltage changes occurring over many minutes can affect voltage stability.

For transient voltage stability, and for the final stages ofa sloweroccurring voltage collapse, thedynamic characteristics of loads such as induction motors are critical. Forthe slower forms ofvoltage instability, a key question is whetheror not—in power flow simulations—the normal constant power (voltage inde- pendent) load model is valid. In some systems there are enough control devices to keep loads constant, and the load characteristics are then unim- portant until the controls reach limits. In large-scale simulation, constant power loads are usually represented on the high voltage side ofbulk power delivery substations; the neglect of transformer and feeder impedances maycompensate fortheconservative constant power assumption. Constant power may be reasonable for approximate static analysis whena signifi- cant proportion ofthe load is motors (e.g., summertime with air condition- ing). The alternative to constant power load models is representation of voltage sensitive loads plus regulators (i.e., tap changers) which restore load. LOADSYNprogram. EPRI has fundedseveral load modelingprojects, the latest resulting in the LOAD SYNthesis (LOADSYN) computer program [3-5]. Table 4-1 summarizes parameters for models of many load compo- nents. The voltage and frequency sensitivity for static models are in expo- nential form: 4.2 Static and Dynamic Characteristics ofLoad Components 73 eoole ,| 9 »egeslee ela)e|e "3S 3i3 é is slss Ssisis led bal al RIRRR |.

BRS. 5). | RRA) le hg whe s[s/a\5 ests Sls5| ‘|S Saga 3 _| b:i fgsf/eegifse}gsal , $ ASFle. a3a3l|Se e3/e3 alag Talo : 2 2 es al. j2ee2 a Fa edPad edbad Bd a QlQIR/O NON ad] 1S) 3/5 a a be be Be Sealesof a aalgla afbet Pledetl TalelEELLEE 384 lo- 5 cKSy ‘f7F 1cgo jogc BI} lelale 2 aleleloialelslalole slejcloe e alae es ae an ae ea a@llelals|s 2) | + 29] | «| | 00}09/09/09 a9| «9|<0] 0 o eS\ael)aes] S|sicild alo al ala alo, yale) afelele |e elele wghiglo|e/a & xe S\alalailaa SiS ales =|S alles lel a 43 EllBe ealbaealslelewlolale cig alolalolaloa ea 2 bebe ae eear cess rae Si ala alslale ele 8/Blolo S)4)4]a)9aol/88/]«a8 Sloclelala clacla ala slolclo co aiolaalcciac e183 2)<-[elg/8 ||ais e[alg/ee asia ai2 222 ASS S[s|AIRIS/S s/Alsisjslsissisiisaiisissi/sss belg 2 g a 8/8/25 | 8 aslgle| |3| | )e/gl 3 2a|4s|-3a]\-8e|ls| | 2) ) 1 g]212|34]8] | (S/S] 25 2/8} 2 & 2 a] 5|3|| 2] 5 2] 2 53 2) 813/3) | fel |S |S] |S/Elel82s] | lelslale E31a5)51)3).| |S] |S1S] 52) |2] 8/8) 2/215) | [Ele|2l8 a 21813] | 5} 5/3) 3| £15] alg| alslal eld) 2] alg]a/slz 5A) BBE BEEEE EEEEEEE EC2) 2Els=||) .| &) $| s|-5| s|3| 8] 2| 2)8] 2 5\2)512)¢ EBGHE EER ERELEEEHEREEE 2)2)2/8)3)5|3 S/A\S|2)S|S|2]8\x|6|S|e2z)&|23|a2|E a 74 Chapter 4, Power System Loads P=P°EVAoorAflaPr (4.0) Vo fi 0. e-alrV]er[Z|fer (42) Vo 0. These static models may be valid for only a limited voltage range (say, +10%). For motors and discharge lighting, the models are inadequate for large voltage deviations. Representation of loads by exponential models withexponent values less than 1.0 in adynamic simulation isquestionable . First, the load power factor is listed, followed by the static voltage and frequency dependency exponents. N,, is the part ofthe load that is motor. Next is listed the power factor and static model parameters for the non- motor part ofthe load. For example, a heat pump is 90% motor and 10% resistive. Finally, parameters for the dynamic motor model are listed.

The motor load factor (LF,,)is the ratio ofmotor MW load to motor MVArat- ing. Thisis animportant, butoften overlooked, parameter. LF,, is an aver- age value for cyclic load components such as clothes washers and dryers. TheA and B parameters describe the mechanical load torque characteris- ticsas described by Equation 4.8. Figure 4-5 shows the induction motor steady-state equivalent circuit corresponding tothe data ofTable 4-1. R, xX, x, v fk, s Fig. 4-5. Induction motor steady-state equivalent circuit corresponding to data ofTable 4-1. Athird order model is usually adequate for aggregated motors in bulk system dynamic simulation. Stator transients are neglected and electrical transients in one rotor circuit per axis are represented. Figure 4-6 shows the transient state equivalent circuit consisting ofa voltage behind tran- sient impedance. The equations forthe inductionmotor model are [7,8]: 4.2 Static andDynamic Characteristics ofLoad Components 75 R, x’ I Fig. 4-6. Induction motor transient-state equivalent circuit. dE, , » X-x' os = -@,sE,- +z,Pe Sat.ig (4.3) T, T, dE, 1, + X-x’ —at =-T_E at O8E - iT i, (44..4) ° = SIR, (vg-Ey) -X (vy -Ey, 45 aig = Fay! ‘3(Uqg-Eq)-X (v,-E,)) (4.5) 8 i, = ——,|[-X (v,-E,) +R, (v,-E,)] (4.6) q R?4x? qd sia 4a T, = Eyig+Egi, (4.7) Tm = Ty. (AO? +Bo,, +C), Aw, +Ba,, +C = 1 (4.8) do, 1 = ag (Te Tm) (4.9) _ Fe ae - T,» X,+X, . . = oR (transient open-circuit time constant) (4.10) ote X = X,+X,, (rotoropen-circuit reactance) (4.11) X . X,,X, oo. =X,+>—} (blocked rotorshort-circuit reactance) (4.12) SX, +X, In these equations, voltages and currents are in terms ofd and q axis components referred to a synchronously rotating reference frame. In the a 76 Chapter4, PowerSystem Loads first twoequations the variables is slip. The companion book provides a rigorous derivation of the equations for the various types of induction motors.

More detailed induction motor models are available in transient stabil- ity programs such as EPRI’s Extended Transient Mid-Term Stability Program (ETMSP) . These may be necessary for large individual motors in an industrial plant, or for power plant auxiliary motors. For smaller motors, however, an even simpler model involving the steady state equivalent circuit and the inertial differential equation (Equation 4.9) is often adequate. The LOADSYN program requires the user to specify the percent of eachload class (residential, commercial, industrial, etc.) foreach bus, area, or zone. The program then determines the load class composition and the load characteristics by component (Table 4-1). For load class composition, the user can enter data for various seasons and load levels (on-peak, off- peak) or can use one ofseveral built-in load composition data bases. The user can specify that loads above a certain value include dynamic motor models—the program will determine the data sets for an aggregated motor model. Figure 4-7 shows the load modeling structure. Load Bus (by | Load Class Mx [Residential [industrar bus) Co catn Central Air Fluorescent (by sitio in Lightin nee class) Conditioning ghting Load Characteristic 7_wp (by component) = Fig. 4-7. LOADSYN modeling structure . In large-scale studies, the usernormally specifies the forecasted active and reactive loads at the high voltage side ofa bulk power delivery substa- 4,2 Static and Dynamic Characteristics ofLoad Components 77 tion. Using the power factordata oftheloadcomponents, LOADSYN deter- mines the total reactive loadofthecomponents. Thedifference between the user-specified reactive load and the LOADSYN-computed reactive load is due (at least partly) todistribution system reactive losses and reactive com- pensation. LOADSYN adds reactive compensation at the high voltage bus tomatch the user-specified reactive load.

LOADSYN aggregates the load voltage/frequency characteristics ofthe load components for classes and converts them to load models recognized by several power flow and stability programs. The model often used is a combination ofconstant impedance, constant current, and constant power. The conversion is a curve-fitting process. LOADSYN aggregates motor load providingdynamicmodels for stability programs . Thresholds may be set for use ofdynamicmodelsbased on size ofload ordistance from fault. The interpretation ofthePu and Qu terms in Equations 4.1 and4.2 and Table 4-1 is that Pu is the AP for a AV and Qu is the AQ for a AV. We can show this using a two-term binomial expansion of Equation 4.1 with fre- quency constant: PoAtP _ ae 14 oP E + 7] = 1 +Pol | Po Vo Po Vo Vo Po AP/P, AP = Typ Pe = ay with Po = Vo = 1pu Distribution feeder representation. Figure 4-8 shows the typical model for large-scale power flow and stability simulations. Figure 4-9 shows a model with an equivalent representation ofthe distribution system. Com- paring the two models, we note that the simple model has the following shortcomings : ¢ The load (including compensation) responds to voltage and fre- quency changes at the high voltage bus rather than at the load itself. ¢ Reactive losses and compensation effects are direct functions of the high side bus voltage; they are really more dependent on current in feeders andtransformers. * For power flow and longer-term dynamics, tap changing effects are notrepresented. Example 4-2. During voltage decay orduring a voltage swing, voltage at a bulk power delivery high voltage bus drops from 1.05 per unit to 0.9 per unit. With no regulation, calculate the voltage at the utilization point assuming a reactance of 15% on the load base. (The reactance comprises a 78 Chapter4, PowerSystem Loads Bulk power delivery substation high voltage bus re Load P+jQ Fig. 4-8. Typical large-scale simulation model usingLOADSYN.

Bulk Distribution power delivery transformer LTC transformer equivalent Fe ival eeder equivalent Load Ps+ii@ T Reactivepower T Voltage control management capacitor bank capacitor bank Fig. 4-9. Load model with distribution system equivalent. 10% bulk power delivery transformer reactance, 3% distribution trans- former reactance, and 2% feeder reactance.) The voltage at the load, V, is initially 1.0 per unit. The 1.0 perunit load is a motor with Pu = 0 and Qu = 2. Capacitive compensation is used to achieve 1.0 per unit voltage. Calcu- late the voltage at the load when the source voltage, E, drops to 0.9 per unit. Solution: Equations 1.1 and 1.2 are used to calculate initial reactive power flow to the load. b= . 1x 0.15 ares—_— = 8.2° 705 x 1 Q, EVcosé- V* = —_— x = 0.26 pu Q, is matched by the reactive load ofthe motor (0.75 per unit for 0.8 power factor) and the capacitive compensation. The net reactive load is a reactance since Qu = 2. With the source voltage drop from 1.05 to 0.9 per unit, the following equation matches the load reactive power to the deliv- ered reactive power. 4.2 Static and Dynamic Characteristics ofLoadComponents 79 0.26V? = 0.9Vcos (aresin (0.15/0.9V)) -V* 0.15 The voltage at which the left hand side equals the right hand side can besolved by trial and error using a spreadsheet program. The solution is V = 0.8492 per unit. The voltage gradient is not much different from the ini- tial 5%gradient. Ournext example is more dramatic. Example4-3. Reference 3, Volume 1, computed power flows for the simpli- fied distribution system shown on Figure 4-10. The computations are for a range ofsource voltages and for three types ofactive loads (constant power, constant current, and constant impedance). The reactive load is constant impedance. Figure 4-11 shows theresults, which you should examine. QP,, Vy Vv, V5 P, = 0.9 pu 0.07 + j;0.16 0.03 + j;.03 at V; = 1pu Q, = 0.4V3 Swing bus T Q= 0.4V3 pu Fig. 4-10.

Example 4-3: Distribution system representation. £12 1 ans = 4 5 J 2 3200.86 Real 2: 08 £ power sg FA [J > 0.7 go¢ te Reactive 3 B02 gee 2 ———————— ° fo —— zt 05 0.8 0.9 1 11 0.8 0.9 1 11° Swing bus voltage - per unit Swing busvoltage - per unit (a) (b) Fig. 4-11. Example 4-3: Plots of variables versus source voltage for three typesofactive load. a 80 Chapter 4, Power System Loads Voltage reduction experience. Many utilities use intentional voltage reduction to obtain load reduction during times ofgeneration or transmis- sion capacity shortages. Since the oil embargo ofthe 1970s, utilities have evaluated and implemented voltage reduction to conserve energy (conser- vation voltage reduction)—often after pressure from regulatory agencies. Many utilities have also used voltage reduction as an emergency measure to improve voltage stability. For example, the 1988 North American Elec- tric Reliability Council (NERC) System Disturbance Report listed eight days ofvoltage reduction in the eastern U.S. during the summerof1988. Voltage reduction is accomplished through tap.changing transformers and distribution voltage regulators. Manyfield measurements ofthe effectiveness ofvoltage reduction have been reported in the literature; references 11-13 are a sampling. To be effective, reduction of voltage-sensitive load must overwhelm the loss of load diversity (i.e., heaters staying on longer). Experience has generally been favorable, although savings may not always begreat enough tojustify the capital additions to more closely regulate voltage. Table 4-2 summa- rizes the percent demand reduction fora 1% reduction in voltage from tests bythree utilities : Table4-2 Consumes PoverCompuny [essa San Diego Gas & Electric Co. Voltage reduction is a tool to improve voltage stability. Load character- istics and composition data are needed to evaluate the benefits during crit- ical heavy load periods.

Thevoltage reduction should be asclose as possible to the loads and downstream from shunt capacitor banks. Often the per- cent reduction in reactive power load is much more than the reduction in active load. This is because distribution transformers and some motors are operated in magnetic saturation at normal voltage. Following voltage reduction, constant energy active load will be restored after some minutes bythermostatic and manual control. Distribution automation facilitates implementation of voltage reduc- tion. Reference 15 describes application atVirginia Power Company. 4.2 Static and Dynamic Characteristics ofLoad Components 81 The active and reactive power voltage sensitivities we have described are for small voltage changes. For voltage stability, the performance of certain loads atquite low voltage is also important. Dischargelighting. About one-thirdofcommercial loadis lighting — largely fluorescent. Fluorescent and other discharge lighting has a voltage sensitivity Pv in the range 1-1.3 and Qu in the range 3-4.5. At voltages between 65-80% ofnominal they will extinguish, but restart (with a hys- teresis characteristic and one or two seconds time delay) when voltage recovers. For a large population oflamps, a single-value function (no hys- teresis)modelisused: between 75% and 65% voltage the discharge lighting load is ramped tozero [17,18]. There are new fluorescent lighting controls that rapidly vary lamp output to complement natural lighting. These controls correct for voltage variations, resulting in aconstant power load characteristic. Induction motors. About 57% ofthe U.S. electricity consumption goes to power motors, mostly integral horsepower three-phase induction motors . About 78% of industrial sector energy use is for motors; the corre- sponding values for residential and commercial sectors are 37% and 43%. Induction motors consume about 90% oftotal motor energy.

Most of residential and commercial motor use is for the compressor loads ofairconditioningand refrigeration. Compressor loadsrequire nearly constant torque at all speeds, and are the most demanding froma stability viewpoint. Pumps, blowers and fans, and compressors account for more than halfofindustrial motor use . Surveys cited in reference 19 found that motors are commonly over- sized, with perhaps halfofall integral horsepower motors operating at less than 60% of rated load. Large industrial motors and motors supplied as partofpackaged equipment, however, are usually properly sized. The energy consumption patterns are not representative of peak summertime load conditions when heavily loaded airconditioners comprise a much larger share of motor load. Domijan et al. state that 30% of energy consumption inFlorida is for air conditioning. The steady-state active power drawn by motors is fairlyindependent of voltage until the point ofstalling. Motor reactive power is more sensitive to voltage levels and other effects. As voltage drops, the reactive power will firstdecrease, but then increase as the voltage drops further. On Table 4-1 the Qu cited for motor loads varies between 0.4 and 3.5. Values of Qu greater than 2 probably reflectoperation with motorcore saturation. Many motors, and appliances containing motors, were tested as part of EPRI-funded research on conservation voltage reduction. Figure 4-12 shows typical results for a 20 horsepower motor . As expected, the a 82 Chapter 4, PowerSystem Loads £13 Torque z 212m S 1.2 S44 Constant LoadTorque s 14- 1.0 pu _ a 5 4. FE 0.9 ¢ 808-4 LO0 LS 4.2pu a7 SSO YY (OZpu 2 o7 a o8Y6] 2-=7 5 0.6 Uc B05] .O77Pe 3 a 0.4 0.85 0.9 095 1 1.05 1.1 1.15 Voltage - per unit < 13 2 Torque 5 1.2 et2py rad 3 Variable LoadTorque a tf 10py 50.9 “4 2 Lor 80.8 aos 207 Z oC 12pu_ wy, 0.7pu 2 og4 Lou 7 nSoc} 0.7pu - s 054 = £04 0.85 09 095 1 1.05 1.1 1.15 Voltage - per unit Fig. 4-12.

Static active (solid lines) and reactive power (dashed lines) curves versus voltage for a 20 horsepower, 230-volt, three-phase induction motor. Top curves for constant torque; bottom curves for torque propor- tional tothe square ofthespeed [6, Volume 1]. PO _ 4.2 Static and Dynamic Characteristics ofLoad Components 83 curves show that constant torque loads and heavy loadings are more oner- ous for voltage stability; the motor is stall-prone. The reactive power volt- age sensitivity decreases with increased loading. From the slopes of the curves, values ofQu can be determined. For constant torque loads, the val- ues(around rated voltage) are about 1.8, 1.4, and 1.0 for loadingsof0.7 per unit, 1.0 per unit, and 1.2 per unit, respectively. For variable torque loads, thecorresponding slopes are 1.9, 1.5, and 1.3. Airconditioning and heatpumps. Voltage instability is likeliest during very high load levels caused by extreme temperatures. For summertime conditions, a major part of the load will be air conditioners. Figure 4-13 plots test data from EPRI-funded research . The figure shows typical air conditioner static performance as a function of temperature and volt- 1 s P 115°F (46.1°C) Fog were) yy a o 08 P 95°F (35°C) 3 4 £07 P 85°F (29.4°C) 4 o iy = S74 2 a Dp £00 2 oy =5 06 Q 115°0F (46.1°°C)_- YA 2 -—o 7 o SLreo ao] 3c954 Q 95°F (35°C) @ c —— > Q 85°F (29.4°C) 0.4 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 1.05 141 Voltage - perunitof230 volts Fig. 4-13. Static active and reactive power curves versus voltage for 119,000 BTU, 208/230 volt, three-phase central airconditioner [11, Volume 2:Appendixes]. Data is curve fitted; some data for reactive power at 95° is suspect. — 84 Chapter4, Power System Loads age. Heat pumps have similar characteristics, except for the cooling mode atverycoldtemperatures when the supplementary resistance heatingmay dominate. Related to Figures 4-12 and 4-13, reference 11 provides test results forotherloads.

Wenotefrom Table4-1 that airconditioners havelowinertia constants (A) and thus are prone to stall. Reference 21 reports recent tests ofrecov- ery of air conditioner motors following faults. The tests showed that air conditioners will decelerate and stall at fault voltages below about 60%— assuming five-cycle or longer fault clearing time. With slower fault clear- ing, air conditioners may stall at higherfault voltages.After source voltage returns to normal, stalled motors will not recover until compressor pres- sure bleeds off. Thermal overload protection will disconnect the air condi- tioner in 3 to 30 seconds. Large commercial air conditioners have undervoltage relays, however, that trip the units within five cycles after voltage dropsbelow 70% . The July 23, 1987 Tokyo blackout was partly due to characteristics of new, electronically-controlled air conditioners (load commutated inverter). . The characteristics of the new equipment is even more unfavorable than conventional airconditioners. Induction motortorque-speedcurves. Torque-speed curves describe the stall characteristics of induction motors. Motor stalling also depends on inertial and flux dynamics which, along with network and disturbance characteristics, determine motor speed and voltages. Motor electrical torque is proportional to the voltage squared. This can be seen from the equivalent circuit shown ofFigure 4-5. Neglecting the shunt magnetizing path, the motor current is the terminal voltage divided by the circuit impedance. Theelectrical torque is the airgap power (less the rotor copper loss) divided bythe motor speed: p= pk (4.3) a, 8 Since torque is proportional to current squared, it is also proportional tovoltage squared. Figure 4-14 shows torque-speed curves, as a function of voltage and temperature, for a residential central air conditioner compressor motor. The constant torque mechanical characteristic shown is the most demand- ing.

Stalling occurs when mechanical torque exceeds available electrical torque, resulting in deceleration. For compressor loads (air conditioners and refrigerators), restarting or reaccelerating following a briefoutage or voltage dip may not be successful until compressor pressure bleeds off (21-23). 4.2 Static and Dynamic Characteristics ofLoad Components 85 35 30 Percent rated voltage 110%, 25 9 E =20 ( , a) 8 oN 315 \\ e ("> 10 (a) 115°F (46.1°C) \ 5 (b) 105°F (40.6°C) (c) 90°F (32.2°C) 0 0 1800 3600 Speed - RPM Fig. 4-14. Torque-speed curves for5 HPsingle-phase residential central air conditionercompressor motor. Source: General ElectricCompany. Considering torque-speed curves such as Figure 4-14, the improved stabilityofmechanical loads with torque varyingas the square ofthe speed can be visualized. A speed-squared torque relation characterizes fan and pump loads. Induction motor dynamics. The dynamic characteristics of motors are critical for voltage decay or voltage dips below about 0.9 pu. At sustained low voltages between about 0.7 and 0.9 pu, many motors will stall and draw large amounts of reactive power. Stalling of one motor may cause nearbymotorsto stall.Arelated problem is reacceleration ofmotors follow- ingfaults. Besides the individual motor data of Table 4-1, The LOADSYN research developed aggregated motor data sets using frequency domain techniques [3,5]. Think about the equivalent circuit of induction motors (Figure 4-5). Following a disturbance, a motor will first act as an impedance load— the slip, s, cannot change instantly, only after inertial dynamics lasting a few tenths of a second. This “impedance jump” response to a step change in voltage will be pointed outinsimulation examples in Chapter 6. Example 4-4, Thisexampleisbased on Sekine and Ohtsuki . Consider the P-V curve of an induction motor fed from a weak power system.

Assume the motor: (1)is ata normal operating point, and (2) is transiently a 86 Chapter4, Power System Loads on the bottom side of the P-V curve. Analyze the effect of energizing a capacitorto stabilize themotor. Will thevoltage increase ordecrease?What will be the final operating point? Solution: Figure 4-15 shows that low voltage (i.e., bottom side of the P-V curve) results in increased slip. Figure 4-16 shows the system under consideration and a simplified induction motor equivalent circuit. Figure4- 17 shows the corresponding static (constant motor power) P-V curves and the motor constant slip resistance characteristics. Point A is the assumed normalinitial operatingpointontheupper partoftheP-Vcurve, and point B isthe assumed transientoperating pointonthebottom sidebefore capac- itor switching (the transient operating point is at a power equal to the mechanical power). Because of the initial impedance response, capacitor energization causes an immediatejump from pointA toA’ or from point B to B’. In either case, the electrical torque (or power) is greater than the mechanical torque. The motor accelerates, reducing the slip to point C. ouu 250 aod 2 Ratedvoltage © 200 x) 2150 3 499 {= Constant-torque load. 2 \- 5 3 tA7 ad 70%voltage - 50 FT I~ id Variable-torque ) _—_ -— — = load 0 1 Speed - pu Fig. 4-15. Torque-speed curve showing reduction in slip caused by a reduc- tion in voltage. P, V x — Motor a> => Ris model Fig. 4-16. Examplestudy system and simplified induction motor model. 4.2 Static and Dynamic Characteristics ofLoad Components 87 y With capacitor -_- Without Sa Small capacitor -7 slip “7 - I _--— a ~Resistance i——~ Large — 7 curves, — AB’ slip 7 -— | 7 “7 | - | |47 I ‘7 | t 0 Pe 0 Pm(1-s) Fig.4-17. P-Vcurve showing howcapacitor energizationwillresultinoper- ation atpoint C for initial operation ateitherpointA orB .

If voltage decays to a value less than point B and if point B’ (after capacitor switching) is less than the initial power, the motor decelerates rather than accelerates. Motor stalling and voltage collapse follows. Referring back to Figure 4-15, we can further describe conditions for motorstability. Consideroperationatpoint 1 withlowvoltageandconstant torque load. Asmall increase in mechanical load as shown bythe solid line causes the motor to decelerate to new stable operating point 2. At a slip smaller than the slip at maximum torque (point 3), however, the decelera- tion caused by a small increase in mechanical torque will result in motor stalling. Momentary operation at point 3 could be due to deceleration dur- inga fault (short circuit) followed by insufficient voltage recoveryafter line trippingto clear the fault. Again referring to Figure 4-15, motor instability and stalling for a gradual reduction in voltage occurs when the motor maximum torque is reduced to where there is not an intersection with the mechanical load characteristic. In either case, motor instability and stalling could lead to voltagecollapse. Motorcontrols and low voltage contactorreleases. Equally important as motor dynamics and possible stalling are the protection and undervolt- age releases ofmotors. Many, if not most, industrial motors have starter — 88 Chapter4, Power System Loads Stopf- OL Start 4 © — M (1 MMLine + OL C) — OL! Overload MM Fuse Relay Fig. 4-18. Motor starter circuit showing contactor release. Often, control power is through a transformer with 110-volt secondary. controls with ac contactors similarto Figure 4-18. Motors will immediately trip offline when the phase-to-phase voltageenergizing the “M”relay drops low enough. The dropout characteristics are variable. Dropout voltage ranges from about 30% voltage to over 65% voltage and the dropout time ranges from less thana cycle to as long as ten cycles .

In the field, con- tactor dropout has occasionally been experienced at even higher voltage (80-90% voltage). This can be caused by poor maintenance, contamination, orincorrect application (forinstance a 600-volt starter on a440-volt motor). There are several alternatives to the circuit shown in Figure 4-18 that reduce unnecessary tripping ofcritical motors. These include mechanical latch “M” relays and control power from a source other than the power sys- tem. Starters are available that will reconnect the motor following a momentary voltage dip. Very large motors have circuit breakers and relays which will trip the motoronly ifdamage is imminent. Small motors on appliances and tools (refrigerators, single-phase air conditioners, etc.) normally have only thermal overload protection. Voltage recovery problems owing to single-phase air conditioners stalling on slow- clearing subtransmission and distribution faults have been reported . Before the stalled airconditioners are removed by thermal protection (sev- eral seconds), voltage in a load area can be dragged down. Stalled motors will draw current four to six times normal, prolonging the voltage dip. Ground relays may trip lines becauseofthe unbalanced loading. Because of the many unknowns regarding motor control and protec- tion, disconnection ofload should not be relied on to prevent voltage insta- bility. 4.2 Static and Dynamic Characteristics ofLoad Components 89 Adjustable speed drives. Motors using power electronics for variable speedcontrol arebecoming common. Ifcontrolled rectifiers are used, power factor will be improved for low voltage as the firing angle is reduced to maintain devoltage . Experience has been that adjustable speed drives will drop off line at about 90% voltage. This may eventually change as manufacturers respond tocomplaintsaboutnuisance trips. Synchronous motors. Synchronous motors are normally used in high power(megawatt-level)applications.

Theyaremorecomplex and expensive thaninduction motors, but are also moreefficient. Use ofexcitation control toregulate voltage results infavorable characteristics forvoltage stability. Modeling is similar to synchronous generators except that a mechani- cal load model such as Equation 4.8 is required. Electronicpower supplies. Regulated power supplies on computers, and other electronics will provide constant devoltage down to around 90% volt- age . Below this voltage the power will fall and the equipment may not operate properly. Figure 4-19 shows an envelope ofvoltage tolerance that is representativeofthe present design goal ofacross section ofthe electronic equipment manufacturing industry [28,29]. 200 Ra $ 106% 2 100 SOTT $ Lackof stored 87% energy issome equipment 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000 Time in cycles (60 Hz) Fig. 4-19. Typical voltage tolerance envelope for electronic power supplies, ANSI/IEEE Std446-1987. ©1987 IEEE. Constantenergyloads andloaddiversity. Loadssuch as space heating, water heating, industrial process heating, and air conditioning are con- a 90 Chapter 4, Power System Loads trolled bythermostats, causingthe loadstobe constant energy. Forheating loads, low voltage results in loss of load diversity since individual loads stay on longer. Over time, the aggregated load changes from resistive to constant power. Graf studiedtheresponse oflarge numbers ofconstant energy loads to voltage drops and developed a single time constant model. Figure 4-20 shows the response ofmany loads to a step reduction in volt- age. The response time constant is around four minutes. For very large voltage drops, the load is not restored, indicating all loads are on continu- ously and the required energy cannot be satisfied. For the 10% voltage reduction there is a small amountofovershoot. 11 105 1 20% 0.9 208 30% ° ' 40%step voltagereduction 8 0.7 © 06 0.5 0.4 0.3 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Time - seconds Fig. 4-20.

Response of 10,000 constant energy loads to step reduction in voltage . Go 2 KG, Vv Gy(V/V,)? ~— 1 G CG) P Fig. 4-21. Single time constant model ofresponse ofmany constant energy loads to voltage changes . G is load admittance, Gy is initially con- nected load conductance. K,Gp is conductance with all loads on. PF 4.2 Static and Dynamic Characteristics ofLoad Components 91 Figure 4-21 showsa single time constant model. Field measurements at two substations in Sweden showed similar active load recovery with time constants ofonly two—fourminutes [31,32]. Electric space heating may bea large load during cold weather. The effective time constant for loss of diversity becomes shorter during cold weather depending on factors such as temperature, wind, and building thermal time constants. The heater-on cycle time willbe longerand the off cycle time will be shorter. Example 4-5. Consider four thermostatically-controlled electric space heatingloads of1 pu power each. The weather conditions are such that, for 1 puvoltage, they are on for fourminutes andofffor fourminutes. The on/ offcycles ofthe four heaters are initially symmetrically distributed sothat two heaters are on at any point in time. The voltage suddenly drops to 0.894 pu so the heater powerdrops to 0.8 pu. Calculate the new on and off times forconstant energy and sketch the time response. Solution: The average power per heater is 0.5 pu. This must be main- tained for constant energy. Following the voltage reduction, the off time willremain atfour minutes. The on time will increase. We can calculate: avg P= 0.5 = 28 (Fon) +0 om) > to, = 6.67 minutes ton t+low Figure 4-22 shows the response. The load initially drops by 20% butin two minutes temporarily overshoots to 120% of initial load. With more loads, the response will approach that shown on Figure 4-19. Air conditioning and othercompressor loads are constant energy load.

However, since they are nearly a constant power load before thermostatic control, there willbe little change in load diversity withvoltage changes. Generation in load area. Relatively small non-utility generation (cogen- erators associated with industrial loads or independent power producers) may be embedded ina load area. The larger synchronous generators (and synchronous motors) with automatic voltage regulators will improve volt- age stability. Excitation control on smaller synchronous generators connectedto distribution networks mayinstead regulate powerfactor soas tonot interfere with utilityvoltage regulation . Many non-utility generators are induction generators with shunt capacitor compensation. Performance is similartoinductionmotors. Induction generators are simpler and cheaper. Synchronous genera- tors, however, are more efficient and are usually used for the larger power ratings. a 92 Chapter4, Power System Loads 1 V0 0.CC 0.894 10 20 t-minutes 30 P, O 0.8 10 20 t-minutes 30 P.2 1.0 0.8 10 20 t-minutes 30 Ps { CI0 08 10 20 t-minutes 30 Py 10, og Py 10 20 t-minutes 30 27 20 : 16 10 20 t-minutes 30 Fig. 4-22. Example 4-5: response offourthermostaticallycontrolled heaters to voltage reduction. Heater offtime is 4 minutes. Heateron time is 4 min- utes initially, and6.67 minutes after voltage reduction. Representing embedded generation in simulations is a challenge. Network reduction software can be used to develop equivalents for sub- transmission networks which include non-utility generators of significant size. 4.3 Reactive Compensation of Loads The secondary or distribution side ofbulk power deliverysubstations often includes shunt capacitor compensation. The capacitor banks are generally for“reactive powermanagement” ratherthan fordirect voltagecontrol. For example, ifthe load drawn from the main transformer is high, capacitors 4.3 Reactive Compensation ofLoads 93 are switched on. Heavy load means relatively high reactive demand and reactive losses.

The capacitor banks are relatively large and at least some banks are switchable. The capacitors alsorelease transformer capacity. One approach to reactive power management is to minimize reactive transfer between voltage levels. This supports the general principle ofsup- plyingcompensation close to reactive power consumption. Control variables include current, reactive power, power factor, time, temperature, and combinations. Current and combinations (which usually includes voltage) are the most used. Capacitor control must be coordinated with tap changer control. Control variables otherthan voltage, such ascur- rent, facilitates coordination. Distribution feeders often have capacitors distributed along their length. Switched capacitors nearthe end offeedersare usuallyvoltage con- trolled. With distribution automation, the future will probably see more centralized control of substation capacitor banks and feeder capacitors to optimize operation ofan entire area. Industrial load usually includes shunt capacitor compensation. This is because oflagging power factor induction motors. Depending on the load, harmonic filters (capacitive at fundamental frequency) may be needed. Static var compensators. Transmission applications of static var com- pensators are described in Chapter 3. Static var compensators, however, were first developed for large fluctuating industrial loads such as arc fur- naces and rolling mills. Sizes range from about 25-100 MVAr. The devices are effective and many installations are in service. Current or reactive power rather than voltage is often controlled. Miller devotes a chapter toreactive compensation ofarc furnaces. SVCs (as small as one MVAr) have been applied at smaller loads. Reduction ofvoltage dip during starting oflarge motors is one application .Application atfluctuating loads include miningloads, saw mills, paper mills, and induction furnaces. Single phase loads include automatic weld- ers and electrified railroads.

Following a disturbance, the voltage sags provide temporary relief; in less than a minute, however, tap changing equipment Po Be oe 4.4 LTC Transformers and Distribution Voltage Regulators 95 R X, Vv, I Vv, V.. IX, i v, T IR R X, x,c Vv, Xo I = Tx V, Vv L s V, r r I IR Fig. 4-24. Phasor diagram showing series capacitor voltage boost with lag- gingpower factor load . TERECaebones wiser aM y yo Wy “oh fa; “E y ig i Pa aiccs a ipge “Ah : on wet ag - > a . Fig. 4-25. Distribution network series capacitor. General Electric Company. “= 96 Chapter 4, Power System Loads starts to restore the load-side voltage, and thus the load. We will now examine tap changing. Bulk power delivery load tap changing (LTC) transformers and distri- bution voltage regulators act similarly in regulating load-side voltage. A voltage relay monitors load-side voltage. Ifvoltage drifts, orjumps, outside a deadband (bandwidth is typically 2 volts on 120-volt base or +0.83%), a timer relay is energized. (An inverse-time voltage regulating relay may be used in older installations rather than an instantaneous voltage relay and timer.) Iftherelay timesout(after tens ofseconds), thetapchangingmech- anism will be energized and tapping takes place until the voltage goes in- band, oruntil the maximum orminimum tap is reached. Once in-band, the voltage relay and timer mechanism is reset. In the course ofa voltage col- lapse, tap changers on individual transformers or voltage regulators may reset several times, slowing the voltage collapse process. Bulkpower delivery LTC transformers and distribution voltage regula- tors usually have +10% tap range consisting of thirty-two steps of 5/8% each. Time delay before tapping is adjustable—a range of10-120 seconds is common. Thirty or sixty seconds delay is typical. For a very large voltage drop, the timeto tap from neutral to full boost(timer delayfollowed by six- teen steps) is often around twominutes.

Practices of utilities outside North American are often different. In Europe, constant or inverse timing (5-120 seconds) is used between each tap step. With a long time delay between each step, voltage decay will be much slower, allowingmore time forcorrective measures. Figure 4-26 shows a 12/16/20 MVA bulk power delivery LTC trans- former. Figure 4-27 shows a single-phase voltage regulator. Calovic provides a detailed model for tap changers. The model, shown on Figure 4-28, is adapted for use in the EPRI Extended Transient Mid-Term StabilityProgram (ETMSP). Table 4-3 shows test results by a utility to determine time for tapping from neutral to full boost. Note that thirty second delay, with about two minutes for full raise is about average. (For a large voltage drop during heavy load conditions, fewer than sixteen steps would usually be avail- able.) Line drop compensation. Particularly for individual feeder regulators, line drop compensation is often used to regulate a point farther down the feeder. Figure 4-29 showsa circuit with line drop compensation toregulate a point R +jXprimary ohms down the feeder . Note that the capacitor current is subtracted in the current transformer circuit. The capacitor would beswitched byadifferent measurement (current, time, temperature, t 4.4 LTC Transformers and Distribution Voltage Regulators 97 fs 2 — eo 4 \ heRe ENE > ; a ie AP Bes aa: o/h ae Nae ~be Le ks Cae ys aS Fig. 4-26. 12/16/20 MVA LTC transformer. Cooper PowerSystems. af — ia Fig. 4-27. Single-phase distribution _——— : Big voltage regulator.

Cooper Power 4 L: } Systems. a J 98 Chapter 4, PowerSystem Loads 8 ¢ Fy i) Z 8 5 io i] g a . 5 e @ < g = ° ye € o 5B 4 é eee 233 <= Rcee # B@ al gz #28 £8 ont on ll FI es ngewe S 52 f+... & eSasd o= ©s ,£ 6.8 : 589 ‘ $5 yA Rew Bs og e C) 62 St+tvVv AA ah + 2e6e5 OM SS 3Il nou & & & Sn 2i.8 = fq ee SES ge ees? —E Gs ont Be a8es |_ is e 23 suas Is a So 8 SPSS 5 " a S2°e°os2 |=|= §5 Bs © 36 gs yy go 2B5e ST a 8 33 § a f s & wo ffl. bd So ev oe ge Ew |e S$ 262 EO «CBE Ee |= BS § Bat 3B = > ©3282 uu 0 0 2 Ben FSF ww os 2 BespiF eee Fs > azoge?s > .U et 5 an SE, eee eS Pe 4 a Esl, ocekR MAA q ae —| F*YoS cow 8B $3 |2 -8 p5J ss bee 28 =u [-* s Steer g€ss 88 ost ots ies now y BR OlS Sased —" geoO eae = oH sm? > 805 oo & | 2 &g +O = sgs% ef ae& ay a o§ + + as ag . +5 > > Bs iy im 4.4 LTC Transformers and Distribution Voltage Regulators 99 Voltage regulator I, +Io , 4 a pmVoltage \i R regulator ° relay T Fig. 4-29. Distribution voltage regulator with line drop compensation. orvoltage on generation side ofregulator). Génen describes methods to setline drop compensation when there is distributed load between the reg- ulator andthe desired point ofregulation. Table 4-3 : i Timer Steps to | Timetofull ative! C,115/21-kV #3 [Manuf. D, 1 16 D, 115/12-KV Manuf. D, 2 | 30 | 16 104 E,230/21-KV#1 30 16 76 F 115/12-KV #1 |Manuf. D, 3 94 = 100 Chapter4, PowerSystem Loads LTCs in series. Occasionally, two (or even three) automatically-controlled tap changers are in series. A bulk power delivery LTC transformer may serve longfeeders with voltage regulators alongthe feeders. Another possi- bility is transmission/subtransmission LTC transformers serving bulk power delivery LTC transformers. The larger generation-side transformer should havetheshortest tapchanger timedelay. Fora small changein net- work voltage, the generation-side transformer would tap one step before the load-side regulatortimer would operate.

For larger voltage changes, such as associated with voltage instability, coordination might not be realized. The distribution voltage and the load may overshoot its original value [42,43]. Because ofthe combined effect of both tap changers, distribution voltage will restore before the upstream voltage. The upstream LTC will continue to operate, causing distribution voltage overshoot. Figure 4-30 showsa possible time response to a step reduction in source voltage. We assume the subtransmission LTC hasa thirty second delay in tapping and that the bulk power delivery LTC hasa forty-five sec- ond delay. We also assume each tap step takes five seconds. Once the volt- age passes through the controller deadband, the timer is reset and must time out again before correcting for an overshoot. (We ignore the feedback ofchanges ofload and ofsubtransmission/distribution losses on voltages.) Figure 4-30 shows a three step overshoot, corresponding to about 2% over- voltage (5/8% steps). Besides increasing load above pre-disturbance levels, the voltage over- shoot could cause voltage-controlled capacitors totrip off. The load overshoot problem can be avoided by short time delay (10-30 seconds) onthe upstream tapchanger and a longdelay (60-120 seconds) on the downstream tap changer. Referring to Figure 4-30, you may sketch responses on graph paper for other conditions such as changing the second LTC transformer time delay from forty-five seconds to say, thirty and sixty seconds. LTCtransformerequivalentcircuit. The primaryeffect oftap changing on voltage stability is restoration ofvoltage-sensitive load that is reduced during voltage sag. For an ideal transformer, and an impedance load, the load is reflected to the high side by the square of the turns ratio as described in Chapter 2. For a real transformer with leakage impedance, there are additional effects . Figure 4-31 shows a LTC transformer equivalentcircuit.

Fortappingto raise secondary voltage, the primary-side shunt element is a “mathemati- cal” reactor and the secondary-side shunt element is a “mathematical” capacitor. The secondary support depends on additional reactive power 4.4 LTC Transformers and Distribution VoltageRegulators 101 Vv, Vs Vs Subtransmission Load Network LTC Bulk power autotransformer delivery LTC transformer Vv Vy Vy vy Fo -20 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 Time - seconds Fig.4-30. Distribution voltage overshootwith two tap changers in series. from the primary system. The primary or source system must be stiff enough to supportthis effect oftap changing. Example 4-6. A230/34.5-kV transformer has 10% leakage reactance (Y= -j10). Initially n = 1. Calculate the effect oftapping to raise the secondary voltage by 10%. Solution: the off-nominal turns ratio, n, is 1.1. The series term (archi- trave) ofthe equivalent circuit becomes nY = -j11. The primary-side shunt term becomes n(n - 1)Y = -j1.1. The secondary-side shunt term becomes (1-n)¥=j1.0 The shunt elements equate to a reactor ofsize 1.1V7 on the primary side and a capacitor ofsize 1.0V3 onthe secondaryside. Effect of tap changing on shunt compensated loads. We have dis- cussed how tap changing aggravates voltage stability by restoring load fol- lowing voltage drops. This applies particularly to high power factor loads. Sometimes, however, voltage regulation by tap changing can improve volt- age stability. This is true forlagging power factor, voltage-insensitive loads — 102 Chapter 4, Power System Loads lin — (a) Schematic V—v, Y=1/Z Vo (b) Equivalent circuit v, Vo Y, =n(n-1)¥ Y, = (1-n)¥ Fig. 4-31. Transformer equivalent circuit, n is off-nominal turns ratio. that are heavily shunt compensated. Industrial consumers with high motor load is the primary example, but loads with high air conditioning compo- nenthave similar properties. The explanation is quite simple. The real partofthe load is nearly con- stantpower and not affected by tap changing.

The reactive partofthe load may have relatively low voltage sensitivity. The shuntcapacitor compensa- tion, however, has a voltage-squared reactive power sensitivity. Thus, the main effect oftep changing is to supportthecapacitoroutput. Example 4-7. An industrial load has motors that are shunt compensated. Consider the real part of the load to be voltage insensitive. Determine graphically and analytically the voltage sensitivity (at nominal voltage) of the net reactive load assuming 80% shunt reactive compensation. The uncompensated voltage sensitivity is AQ/AV= 1.0. Whatis the effect oftap changing? Solution: Figure 4-32 shows the graphical solution. We see that the voltage sensitivity ofthe capacitor dominates and therefore the net reac- tive load will increase for voltage sag. Voltage regulation by tap changing will reducenetreactive load and improve voltage stability. Analytically: Qnet = road +@eap = 1V"-0.8V? 4.4 LTC Transformers andDistribution Voltage Regulators 103 1.2 1 08 > 06 a 1 0.4 2 02 eo 2 0.2 & -0.4 c .06 0.8 1 1.2 —— 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 Voltage - pu Fig. 4-32. Example 4-7: Graphical solution ofnet reactive voltage sensitiv- ityofshunt compensated load. aAwr"e_ 4 _ (0,8) (2)V= -06 at V = — (0.8()2)V = -0.6 at V = 1 pu Note that the result depends on the voltage sensitivity ofthe reactive part on the load. As described above (Table 4-1 and Figure 4-11), voltage sensitivity depends on factors such as loading and is quite variable. Often, thereactive voltage sensitivity oftheload maybehigherthan 1.0, resulting inless benefit from tapchanging. The supportofcapacitorbank output from voltage regulation should be considered in the placement of capacitor banks. Whenever possible, the capacitors should be on the regulated side oftap changers. In power flow simulation,capacitors should berepresented ontheproperbus. Figure 4-32 shows the effects ofcapacitor bank location on system performance and on power flow simulation .

The small restoration ofreactive powerismainly dueto increased losses (J?X) caused bythe active power restoration. | References 105 i 28 6 26 5$ = P 2 = . B04 Ci"tyof PortAngeles 69-kVfeeder#1 g . Responseto4.5%voltage reduction ae é 12January 1989, 0830 hours o > g 3 © 3 22 Q 3a 20 2 -20 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 Time - seconds Fig. 4-34. Response ofPort Angeles 69-kV subtransmission line to voltage drop. Initial load was 27.3 MWand 4.0 MVAr. References 1. T. Génen, Electric Power Distribution System Engineering, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1986. 2. University of Texas at Arlington, Determining Load Characteristics for Tran- sient Performances, EPRI Final Report EL-848, May 1979, three volumes. 3. GeneralElectricCompany,LoadModelingforPowerFlowandTransientStabil- ity ComputerStudies, EPRI Final ReportEL-5003,January 1987. (Thefourvol- umes; describesLOADSYNcomputer program.) 4. W. W. Price, K.A. Wirgau,A. Murdoch, J. V. Mitsche, E. Vaahedi, and M.A. El- Kady, “Load Modeling for Power Flow and Transient Stability Computer Stud- ies,”IEEETransactions on PowerSystems,Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 180-187, February 1988. 5. F. Nozari, M. D. Kankam,andW. W.Price,“Aggregation ofInduction Motors for Transient Stability Load Modeling,”IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 2,No. 4, pp. 1096-1103, November 1987. 6. M. K. Pal, discussion of“An Investigation ofVoltage Instability Problems,” by N. Yorino et al., IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 600-611,May 1992. 7. D. S. Brereton, D. G. Lewis, and C. C. Young, “Representation of Induction- MotorLoads During Power-System Stability Studies,” TransactionsAIEE, Vol. 76,PartIII,pp.451-461,August 1957. 8. Arizona State University, Midterm Simulation ofElectric PowerSystems, EPRI Final Report, EL-596, June 1979. 9. P. Kundur,PowerSystem StabilityandControl, McGraw-Hill, 1993. 106 Chapter 4, Power System Loads 10.

EPRI, User's Manual—Extended Transient/Midterm Stability Program Pack- age(ETMSPVersion 3.0), preparedbyOntarioHydro,June 1992. 11. University ofTexas at Arlington, Effects ofReduced Voltage on the Operation andEfficiency ofElectric Loads, EPRI Final ReportEL-2036, September 1981. (Twovolumes.) 12. University ofTexas at Arlington, Effects ofReduced Voltage on the Operation and Efficiency ofElectric Loads, EPRI Final Report EL-3591 June 1984 and July 1985 (threevolumes). 13. V. J. Warnock and T. L. Kirkpatrick, “Impact ofVoltage Reduction on Energy andDemand: PhaseII,”IEEETransactions onPower Systems, Vol. 3, No. 2,pp. 92-97, May 1986. 14. N. Savage, discussion ofreference 11, Ibid. 15. C. Crider and M. Hauser, “Real Time T&D Applications at Virginia Power,” IEEEComputerApplications inPower, pp. 25-29, July 1990. 16. “Lighting the Commercial World,” EPRI Journal, Vol. 14, No. 8, pp. 4-15, December 1989. 17. H.K. Clark,T. F. Laskowski,A. WeyFo, andD. C. O.Alves, “VoltageControl in a Large Industrialized Load Area Supplied by RemoteGeneration,”A78 558-9, IEEE/PESSummerMeeting, LosAngeles,July 16-21, 1978. 18. H. K. Clark and T. F. Laskowski, “Transient Stability Sensitivity to Detailed Linoga,dModels: aParametricStudy,” paperA78 559-7, IEEE/PES SummerMeet- Los Angeles, July 16-21, 1978. 19. S. Nadel, M. Shepard, S. Greenberg, G. Katz,A. T.deAlmeida,Energy-Efficient Motor Systems: A Handbook on Technology, Programs, and Policy Opportuni- ties, American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, Washington, D.C., 1991. 20. A. Domijan, Jr., O. Hancock, and C. Maytrott, “A Study and Evaluation of Power Electronic Based Adjustable Speed Motor Drives for Air Conditioners and HeatPumps withan ExampleUtility Case StudyoftheFlorida Power and Light Company,” IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 396-404, September 1992. 21. B. R. Williams, W. R. Schmus,and D. C.

Dawson,“Transmission Voltage Recov- ery Delayed by Stalled Air-Conditioner Compressors,” JEEE Transactions on PowerSystems, Vol. 7, No. 3,pp. 1173-1181,August 1992. 22. A. Kurita and T. Sakurai, “The Power System Failure on July 23, 1987 in Tokyo,” Proceedings ofthe27th IEEEConference on Decision and Control,Aus- tin, Texas, pp. 2093-2097, December 1988. 23. R. J. Frowd, R. Podmore, andM. Waldron, “SynthesisofDynamic Load Models for Stability Studies,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-101,No. 1, pp. 127-135, January 1982. 24. Y. Sekine and H. Ohtsuki, “Cascaded Voltage Collapse,” IEEE Transactions on PowerSystems, Vol. 5,No. 1,pp. 250-256, February 1990. 25. R. Betancourt andM. S. Lin,AStudy of theEffect ofTransient VoltageDropon PowerSystemStability, SanDiegoStateUniversity, January 1986.(Includes an extensive listofreferences related to motorcontrollers.) 26. H. K. Clark,“Load Characteristics,” 1990WSCC StabilitySeminar,April 1990. 27. IEEE Committee Report, “Load Representation for Dynamic Performance Analysis,” paper 92WM 126-3 PWRS,IEEE/PES 1992WinterMeeting. References 107 28. ANSI/IEEE Std 446-1987, IEEE Recommended Practice for Emergency and Standby Power Systems for Industrial and Commercial Applications (IEEE Orange Book) 1987. 29. J. Lamoree, “How Utility Faults Impact Sensitive Customer Loads,” Electrical World, pp. 60-63,April 1992. 30. Klaus-Martin Graf, “DynamicSimulation ofVoltage CollapseProcesses in EHV Power Systems,”Proceedings: BulkPower System Voltage Phenomena—Voltage StabilityandSecurity, EPRI EL-6183,Section 6.3,January 1989. 31. D. Karlsson, K. Linden, I. Segerqvist, and B. Stenborg, “Temporary Load- Voltage Characteristics for Voltage Stability Studies - Field and Laboratory Measurements,” CIGRE, paper38-204, 1992. 32. D. Karlsson, Voltage Stability Simulations Using Detailed Models Based on Field Measurements, Technical Report no. 230, Chambers University ofTech- nology, Géteborg,Sweden, June 1992. 83. H.

Kirkham and R. Das, “Effects of Voltage Control in Utility Interactive Dispersed Storage and Generation Systems,” JEEE Transactions on Power ApparatusandSystems, Vol.PAS-103, No. 8,pp. 2277-2282,August 1984. 34, T.J. E. Miller, editor, ReactivePower ControlinElectricSystems, John Wiley& Sons, NewYork, 1982. 35. W.K.Wong, D. L. Osborn,andJ. L. McAvoy, “ApplicationofCompact StaticVar Compensators to Distribution Systems,”JEEE Transactions on PowerDelivery, Vol. 5,No.2,pp. 1113-1120,April 1990. 36. E. Larsen,N.Miller, S. Nilsson, andS. Lindgren,“BenefitsofGTO-Based Com- pensation Systems for Electric Utility Application,” IEEE Transactions on PowerDelivery, Vol. 7,No. 4,pp. 2056-2064,October 1992. 37. Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electric Utility Engineering Reference Book—Distribution Systems, 1965. 38. S. Elvin, “Using Series Capacitors for Distribution Networks,” Power Technol- ogyInternational 1991, pp. 165-166. 39. J. W. Butlerand C. Concordia, “Analysis ofSeries CapacitorApplication Prob- lems,”Electrical Engineering (AIEE transactions), Vol. 56, No. 8, pp. 975-988, August 1937. 40. L. Morgan, J. M. Barcus, and S. Ihara, “Distribution Series Capacitor with High-Energy Varistor Protection,” paper 92 SM 508-2 PWRD, IEEE/PES 1992 SummerMeeting. 41. M. S. Calovic, “Modeling and Analysis of Under-Load Tap Changing Trans- formerControl Systems,”IEEETransactions onPowerApparatusandSystems, Vol.PAS-103, No. 7, pp. 1909-1915,July 1984. 42. H. K. Clark, “Voltage Control and Reactive Supply Problems,” 1988 WSCC StabilitySeminar,April 1988. 43. W. R. Lachs and D. Sutanto, “Control Measures for Improving Power System Reliability,” CIGRE paper 3A-01, Symposium on Electric Power System Reli- ability, Montréal, 16-18September 1991. 44. W. J. Smolinski, “Equivalent CircuitAnalysis ofPower System Reactive Power and Voltage Control Problems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems,Vol.

PAS-100,No. 2,pp. 837-842, February 1981. “= Generati. on Characteri.sti. cs Nothing in life is to befeared: it is to be understood. Madame Marie Curie The synchronous generator with its controls is one of the most complex devices in a power system. We have described longer-term voltage instabil- ity as usually being caused by two primary factors: load restoration by tap changing andgenerator current limiting—ourinterest is now the latter. Power system disturbances leading to voltage instability often involve generation-load imbalances. This causes redistribution ofpower flow and reactive losses. We must understand how power plants respond to these upsets. Firstwe concentrate ongenerators and excitation systems, and then on prime movers and energy supply systems. 51 Generator Reactive Power Capability The overexcited reactive power supply capability of synchronous genera- tors is critical in preventingvoltage instability. Generatorcapability curves andVcurves. Forthe slowerformsofvolt- age stability, the steady-state generator P-Q capability curves and V curves are our starting point. With the real power loading fixed, the allowable reactive power is lim- ited by either armature (stator) or field (rotor) winding heating. As devel- oped in several textbooks [1-3], the armature and field winding heating limits can be represented by two curves on a real power/reactive power plot. The intersection of the two curves represents the generator rated power factor. Figure 5-1 shows development of capability curves for two generators: a 0.8 power factor generator with relatively low synchronous reactance and a 0.95 power factor generator with high synchronous reac- tance.

The latteristypical ofrecentgenerator design and specification. ~= 110 Chapter5, Generation Characteristics Q Q Field heating limit Field heating limit Machine rating Mraatcinhgine é P P - Armature 2 Armature ° heating ma heating Mt limit xX, limit xX, (a) 0.8 P.F., lowsyn- (b) 0.95 P.F., high syn- chronous reactance chronous reactance Fig. 5-1. Development ofgenerator capability curve . Figure 5-2 shows theVcurvesfor a410-MVAround-rotor generator. For the several values of cooling system pressure shown, the right-hand side limit is due to field heating. Figure 5-3 shows the generator capability curves corresponding to theVcurves ofFigure 5-2. Thegenerator capability is greatly affected by the cooling system—as shown by the curves fordiffer- enthydrogen coolingpressures.Atlagging power factors lowerthan 0.9, the limiting factoris field winding heating. Between rated powerfactor(0.9lag- ging) and 0.95 leading, the limiting factor is armature current. For lower leading power factor, the limiting factor is armature core end heating [3,4] orsystem stability. In the portion ofa capability curve where armature current is limiting, the power capability obviouslyvarieswith terminal voltage. The field wind- ingcurve also varies withterminal voltage [1-3,5]. 5.1 Generator Reactive PowerCapability 111 1.2 Lead Lag 1.0 0.95 1.0 0.95 0.90 3u6w8 ATES)z,y, 0.85 x °° ya LY ORF 7 Wf/ 0.60 = 35 06 A4 YZ lag 5 lead A | a S 04 Yl 02 ly, Es . I, 0 0 1000 2000 3000 Field Current-amperes Fig. 5-2. Generator V curves. Generator nameplate data: 410-MVA, 3600 RPM, 22-kV, 0.9 power factor, 0.58 SCR, 47 psig, hydrogen pressure, 500-volt excitation. ) Figure 5-4, adapted from Lachs , shows the overexcited portion ofa generator capability curve. The figure showsa typical situation where the turbine is sized to match the generator real power at rated power factor. Also shown is the effect ofreduced terminal voltage. We see that reactive power is normally limited by field heating.

Armature current is limiting only ifterminal voltage can no longer be controlled—which might be the case in a voltage emergency. It is apparent that armature current limita- tion depends on the maximum turbine power. Example 5-1. Acompany normally purchases generators with 0.95 power factor. Turbine rating is specified to match the real power at rated power factor. Keeping the turbine rating unchanged, calculate the generator rating if 0.8 power factor is specified. Calculate the additional reactive powercapability atfull load. Solution: Figure 5-1 shows the two generator types. Let the turbine power rating beone per unit. Since P.F. = cos = (P/S), S = 1.0525 for a 112 Chapter 5, Generation Characteristics 400 Lagging 0.60 P-F. 300 47psig 0.70 P.F. ls 0.80 PF. 200 LZ> 0.85 P.F. gs jen 77SSOS 0.90 P-F. yy <> ES c) 0.95 PF. o3 100 LZ<~\" PF & <— S3g 0 @o 2 G o:c SY -100 <> XSC1095 PF. -200 >Sex 0.90 P.F. ——<> 0.85 P.F. 0.80 P.F. Leading 0.70 P.F. 0.60 P.F. -300 0 100 200 300 400 500 Power - megawatts Fig. 5-3. Generator capability curve for the 410-MVA generator whose V curves are shown on Figure 5-2. 0.95 power factor and S = 1.25 for 0.8 power factor. The increase in MVA ratingis 18.75%, buttheincrease incapital costwill be somewhatlessthan 18.75%. Assuming normal operation near unity power factor, the larger machine with more armaturecopper will have lowerlosses; this will reduce the life-cycle costincrease. Using Q = Ptan¢@, the reactive power capability at rated conditions is 0.33 per unit for the 0.95 power factor machine. The reactive capability is 0.75 per unit for the 0.8 power factor machine, or 227% of the smaller machine. The additional controllable reactive power capability could be crucial during a voltage emergency. 5.1 Generator ReactivePowerCapability 113 1 mG = 0.95 pu V, San.

ON. = 1.0 pusSao*SC SN. 08 Rotor S. # limit V, = 1.0 pu 5 &5 N 06 \ 5 V, =0.95 poy =\ 2\ © 0.4 \ s \ Ey * Stator & limit 0.2 Lower turbine Turbine limit limit 0 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 Power - perunit Fig. 5-4. Overexcited portion ofgenerator capability curve showing effect ofreducedterminal voltage . © 1979 IEEE. An effective method to improve voltage stability is to apply shunt capacitor banks so nearby generators can operate near unity power factor with substantial spinning reactive power reserve that can be rapidly acti- vated toprevent voltage instability. Generator Q-V curves. Although it is common to show performance of generators byP-Q capability curves, the important characteristics for volt- age problems can be better shown by Q-V curves.” Such diagrams are constructed froma series ofcapability curvesfor different network (genera- * torhigh-side) voltages, V. The diagram is for the generator plus its step-up transformer ata single value ofactivepower. Froma system viewpoint, the networkvoltage is most important. Figure 5-5 shows a Q-V diagram. The sign convention for reactive power is the same as for a reactor, capacitor, or SVC. Curves for constant *ThefollowingisduetoMr. TorbenK. Ostrup, ElkraftPowerCompany, Denmark . “~= 114 Chapter5, Generation Characteristics V(network voltage) Field current limit V, = 11 ho A —V=10 Rotor angle limit sKvz09 Dy.———— Armature >> . current P =0.8 (fixed) limit 0.5 overexcited underexcited Q 0.5 0.5 Fig. 5-5. Generator Q-V diagram for constant value of active power. In many cases the rotor angle limit, which is not ofconcern for voltage stabil- ity, may beless restrictive. terminal voltage, V,, are shown. If the reference value for the terminal voltage, V,, andthe network voltage, V, are given, the reactive powerofthe generatorcan be found from the figure. When the generator is regulating voltage, the curves for constant V, are very flat.

This indicates that a large change in reactive poweroutputis obtained for a small change in network voltage. Generators keep the network at near constant voltage, thus preventing voltage collapse. The characteristic is similarto a SVC in its activecontrol range. Ifthe network voltage becomes sufficiently low, either the field current limit orthe armaturecurrent limit ofthe generator is reached. This drasti- cally changes the characteristic ofthe generator. The slope ofthe rotor cur- rent limit curve is nearly vertical (nearly constant reactive power output), meaning that voltage support from the generator is lost when this limit is reached. Much worse conditions result ifthe armature current limit is reached. With the armature current limitenforced, the reactivepower from the gen- erator decreases fast if the network voltage is further lowered. Voltage PO 5.1 Generator Reactive PowerCapability 115 instability is likely. Note also that limits on acceptable terminal voltage maybe violated and power plantauxiliary equipment problems may result. Performance under normal and current limiting conditions can be compared with SVCs and shunt capacitors. For field current limiting, the characteristic is less severe than for SVCs at maximum capacitive boost. Armature current limiting is more severe. Synchronous condenser perfor- mance is similartogenerators. The generator Q-V curve can be rotated ninety degrees clockwise and superimposed ona system V-Q curve. The curve should firstbereplottedso reactive power on the network side is shown. Generatorcapabilitypolyhedron. We can viewgenerator capability as a function ofnetwork voltage in three dimensions by the capability polyhe- dron introducedbyProfessor Calvaer .Again, network voltage is plotted asthis is most important for system performance. Figure 5-6 shows a capa- bility polyhedron for a 1330-MVAunit connected to a400-kV grid. Synchronous machine steady-state models.

In conventional power flow programs, generators are represented as “PV buses” with real power specified and reactive power output between minimum and maximum limits (see Appendix B).At a reactive power limit, a PVbus is changed to a PQ bus. The maximum value, Q,,,,, is usuallythe reactive power at rated conditions. This results in a rectangular generator capability curve. Ifgen- erators are operated below rated power, the additional available reactive power should be recognized. Many relatively new generators have high rated power factor and high synchronous reactance (low short-circuit ratio). As Figure 5-1 shows, this makes the difference between a rectangu- lar capability curve and the actual capability curve more important . Referring back to Figures 5-4 and 5-5, an approximate model could simply prevent armature current overload whenever reactive power limit- ing is in effect at a generator (whenever a PVbus is changed to a PQ bus). Inotherwords, Q,,,, isafunction ofterminalvoltage. Depending onactual generator control and protection, time frame, and operator actions, this mayor may notbe an adequate model. Section 5.2 describes generator control and protection which must be represented in detailed simulations. Advanced power flow programs for voltage stability analysis enforce field current limits by direct computation offield current. The computation is similar to generator initialization in transient stability simulation , and includes representation ofgenerator saturation. Ratherthan byaPQbus, agenerator infieldcurrentlimitingis modeled by a voltage behind saturated synchronous reactance; alterna- tively, a two-axis generator model may be used with fixed field voltage. With drop in terminal voltage, the armature current should be monitored = 116 Chapter5, Generation Characteristics for overload.

For normal conditions, advanced programs may also replace the PV bus model with a model that includes the voltage regulator droop effect on terminal voltage (voltage regulators are finite gain, proportional controllers, and terminal voltage will vary with loading.) Field current lim- iter settings, and armature current alarm and protection limits are required for accurate simulation Operating practices. In some situations, voltage stability can be improved by reducing real power on certain generators so that more reac- tive capability is available. If, during a severe disturbance, a generator is feedinga highlyoverloadedline, stability can be improved by reducing real loading and rescheduling the generation at power plants serving lightly loaded linesintothe load area. It’s vital thatthe reactive power expected from a generator’s capability curve actually be available for emergencies. Some utilities have power plant test programs to verify that maximum and minimum reactive power limits can be reached . For operations, it’s important to know the reac- tive capability, as affected by cooling system status. During normal conditions, many generators operate at high power fac- tor. Power plant operators should be trained in the basics ofvoltage stabil- ity and instructed not to reduce generator reactive output during rare system emergencies whenhigh levels ofreactive power output are needed. Generator armature and field overload capabilities. The armature and field overload capabilities givenbyANSI C50.13-1977 are listed below: Armature time (seconds) 10 30 60 120 armature current (percent) 226 154 130 116 Field time (seconds) 10 30 60 120 field voltage (percent) 208 146 125 112 The time-overload capabilities ofarmature and field windings are simi- lar. Note that, at most, overloads should last only two minutes. Excitation could becontrolled to allow a high overload forless than aminute ora mild overload forup to two minutes.

Overload capability depends on the status ofcooling systems. Operator response to overtemperature alarms could lead to limiting of generator output. Exciter equipment (excitation transformer or exciter alternator) over- load characteristics mustalso be considered. 5.2 Generator Control and Protection 117 P-MW fy tf et | | | | Mechanical power limitation Underexcitation SEETELE EEE Et Prt tititt limitation tt Epp proce tt Lit | | armature] | Lh AAR | | current I pt "J | limitation || |4\ | — A<— NX | teld a 0 |] current i limitation Ili ” \\ Il1l00d0 Pir fo==g= =-= ~Nyy ear BO aan SO WkWO Ok W/O SLID LY? IIIIIII=I=I= L- aa V- kV (network voltage) Fig. 5-6. Capability polyhedron for a 1330-MVA generator. Source: F. Van deMeulebroeke, Laborelect, Belgium . 5.2 Generator Control and Protection Excitation control is by automatic voltage regulators (AVRs). Generator terminal voltage is measured and compared to a desired or reference setpoint. The error signal controls the exciter output which is the main generator field voltage. During steady-state operation, terminal voltage is closely regulated by the high gain feedback control system. Typically the terminalvoltageerroris+0.5% from noloadto full load (1% slope ordroop). There is also a small droop due to generator reactive power changes. The small voltage regulating droop can be compared to similar small droops (1-5%) ofstatic varcompensators. Adifference is that a SVC regulates the high voltage or extra-high voltage network bus voltage, while a basic AVR controls generator terminal voltage. | | 118 Chapter5, Generation Characteristics Network voltage control. Voltage stability can be greatly improved if generators regulate network voltage (step-up transformer high-side volt- age). Network voltage shouldbe held as high as possible. There are several methods to improve network voltage regulation; line drop (transformer drop) compensation is the most commonmethod.

With line-drop compensa- tion, the generator current is measured to compute the JZ drop part way through the generator step-up transformer—this becomes the regulated point. Usually the reactive componentofcurrent is used forthe compensa- tion . In multiple generator power plants, 50-80% ofthe transformer leakage reactance is typicallycompensated. Line-drop compensation is more difficult when several units are con- nected tothe same low-sidebus—a typical situation in hydroelectric plants consisting ofmany units. When two or more generators regulate the same point, reactive current compensating circuits or other methods are needed toequalize reactive power sharingand control effort [10,11]. It’s possibleto regulate a point beyond the network bus. An alternative to line-drop compensation is a secondary outer control loop to adjust the voltage regulator setpoint in order to maintain the desired network side voltage. To minimize adversecontrol interactions, the outer loop should be an order ofmagnitude slower than the primary termi- nalvoltage regulation. Network voltage control should therefore respondin around ten seconds following a disturbance. This is sufficiently fast forthe slower forms of voltage instability, i.e., it’s faster than the restoration of load bytap changing. Tokyo Electric Power Company has developeda special controller for fast regulation ofnetwork voltage . Using programmable logic control- lers, Manitoba Hydro has developed a 230-kV voltage controller for nine synchronous condensers at the Dorsey HVDC inverter station [13,14]. French, Italian, and Belgian utilities are developing a “secondary voltage control” centralized method forcontrolling network voltages and generator reactive output [15,16,17]; these techniques are slower and more expensive than local methods. Still another possibility for better network voltage control is load tap changing ofgenerator transformers.

Presumably foreconomic and reliabil- ity reasons, LTC generator transformers are not used in North America. Many overseas utilities, however, use this method. LTC generator trans- formers or LTC auxiliary equipment transformers prevent constraints on terminal voltage magnitude from limiting high side voltage control. For fixed tap transformers, tap settings of main and auxiliary transformers should be optimized taking into account voltage stability performance. 5.2 Generator Control and Protection 119 For voltage stability, optimal performance is when, following a severe disturbance, all generators reach field current limits at about the same time.Appropriate settings can generallybedeterminedoffline. Excitation control for transient voltage stability. Fast excitation control is important for transient stability, including transient voltage stability problems associated with induction motor loads or HVDC links. The speed ofgenerator and excitation system dynamics are similar to the speed ofthe load dynamics. Static exciters and other high initial response exciters will improve stability. High exciter ceiling voltages allowing momentary high field overload are important. P. Kundur covers these topics in the companion book onrotor angle stability . Generatorfield control andprotection. Besides the basic voltage regu- lating function, AVRs have several other functions. Our interest is in the circuitsthatlimitfieldcurrent. Most automatic voltage regulator include an overexcitation limiter or “maximum excitation limiter” which detects high field voltage or current and acts through the regulator to return excitation to a preset value after an adjustable time delay. Brushless exciters do not allow direct measure- ment ofgenerator field current or voltage; either exciter field, or generator armature quantities must be used.

The overexcitation limiter has an inverse timing characteristic coordi- nated with the field thermal capability and field time-overcurrent relay. (Older equipment hasa fixed time delay rather than an inverse character- istic.) Baldwin and McFadden describe the control and protection provided byone manufacturer ; Figure 5-7 shows the coordination. Quoting from Baldwin and McFadden: The Maximum Excitation Limiter (MXL) acts through the reg- ulator to return the level of excitation to a preset value after an adjustable time delay during which overexcitation is permitted. ...Since the limiter acts through the regulator, it cannot provide protection ofthe field for all operating modes, such as manual con- trol, or in the eventofmalfunction ofthe regulator itself. The limiter is therefore supplemented by the overexcitation protection (OXP). This device with inverse timing also has a char- acteristic which matches the generator field capability. The OXP initiates sounding an alarm andrunning thebaseadjuster to a pre- set position, usually that corresponding to rated conditions for the generator. It also initiates regulator trip after the preset interval has passed. Ifthe tripping ofthe regulator and repositioning ofthe base adjuster has not reduced the excitation, it will also initiate a = 120 Chapter 5, Generation Characteristics 120 \ \ \ \ \ 90 \ Generator field capability / \ \ 3 \ Overexcitation protection 8 . 860 aS : . - s.xSS 30 7? Maximum excitation limiter 0 0.9 1 11 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 Generatorfield voltage - perunit of rated Fig. 5-7. Coordination of overexcitation limiting and protection. © 1981 IEEE. The generator field capability corresponds toANSI C50.13-1972. unit trip after an additional fixed time delay, ifthe user so desires. © 1981 IEEE . In other cases, an inverse-time overcurrent relay is used.

In one type, relay operation recalibrates anAVR current limit circuit to rated field cur- rent; operators must manually reset the control circuit to return to normal voltage regulation. In anothertype, operation ofthe relay will trip the AVR to manual; depending on the base adjustment this may result in a large drop in excitation and reactive power. Either type maytrip the generator if the overexcitation is not relieved. In older installations, the overcurrent relay maysimply trip the generator. There are a wide variety of overexcitation control and protection devices in service. Often the power plant must be visited to determine the exact equipment in service and the settings. Replacement ofan old excita- tion system with a modern system employing a continuous field current limiting control loop may behighly desirable. 5.2 Generator Control and Protection 121 Overexcitation limiter modeling. Standard models for excitation limit- ers have not been developed. The companion book provides a detailed model developed for a particular power plant. Figure 5-8 showsa typical model formodern equipment that would often suffice . Excitation transformer V ot Generator {| = Voltage regulator W, 1) ce a oe+ Y A A Overexcitation limiter Fig. 5-8. Model ofoverexcitation limiter. During normal conditions withfieldcurrent less thanthe setpoint(typ- ically 105%ofrated field current), paths 1 and2both force theintegratorto its lowerlimit (-A). The inputto the voltage regulator summingjunction is zero. If field current is above the setpoint, path 2 drives the integrator towards a positive value; once the integrator output becomes positive, the voltage regulator will start to reduce field current. For a step increase in field current above the setpoint, the time to the start of current limiting (time for integratoroutputto ramp tozero) will be: t= oA Kye Ky (Ley — 1.05144rated) The parameters can be adjusted so this time approximates the desired time as shown on Figure 5-7.

Once field current is reduced to the setpoint, path 1 rapidly resets the integrator to -A. Generator armature protection and system backup protection. An IEEE guide describes generator protection in detail. Most generators a 4 122 Chapter5, Generation Characteristics are supplied with a number of resistance temperature detectors (RTDs) which are imbedded in the armature windings. The RTDs may be supple- mented with time-overcurrent relays that are coordinated with the arma- ture short-time overcurrent capability. The RTDs and overcurrent relays provide alarm signals, ortrip the unit. Distance relays or voltage-restrained or controlled overcurrent relays are often applied on generators for“system backup” protection . Arma- ture current andterminal voltage measurements drive the relays. Usually the time delays of these relays are one second or less—this means they don’t coordinate with excitation limiting controls just described. These relays are meant to detecttransmissionsystem faults, butcould operate on overload (high generator reactive output) and lowterminal voltage. Undesirable operation ofthese relays have contributed to several volt- age collapses. Where voltage stability is a concern, the settings of these relays should be reviewed. Sensitive protection prone to operate on over- load may not be necessary where redundant line protection relays and breaker failure relays are used. 5.3 System Response to PowerImpacts By power impact we mean load switching or, more importantly, generation loss. Loss ofa large generator orentire power plant in a load area can bea severe disturbance threatening voltage stability. Aparticularly severe case in the Northeastern U.S. is loss ofimports from HVDC links with Quebec. In other circumstances, generation, especially hydro generation, may be intentionally tripped to prevent voltage instability. We now describe how a system ofmanygenerators responds, over time,to a generation-load imbal- ance.

This will result in terms such as “governor” and “AGC” post-distur- bance powerflow. At any point in time, generation must match load plus losses. Howlost generation is redistributed to remaining generation determines transmis- sion line flows. If heavily loaded transmission lines become even more heavily loaded, reactive powerlossesincrease tothreaten voltage stability. Time sequence ofgeneration response. Immediately following loss ofa generator, how is the lost power accounted for so that generation matches load plus losses? How is the power redistributed? Because some loads are voltage sensitive, there will beloadreduction owingtovoltage sags. Mostof the lost generation, however, is made up bythe remaining generators. For a fraction ofa second, the replacement generation comes from stored mag- netic energy. The generators near the lost generation pick up the most. Power redistribution is according to electrical closeness or “synchronizing coefficients.” In transient stability simulation, the redistribution is the 5.3 System Response toPowerImpacts 123 power flow at t = 0+. The generator internal voltage or flux has not yet decayed. Within a fraction of a second, however, “armature reaction” caused by the increased current will cause flux decay—which is countered byexcitationcontrol. What happens next? Generators slow down and frequency starts to decay because ofthe generation loss. The inertia ofthe generator-turbine rotors limits the rate offrequency decay. The nearby machines deccelerate because of their overload, leading to lightly damped electromechanical oscillations between all generators.Afterafew seconds, theoscillations are _ damped out, and the power redistribution is by relative inertia values | (stored mechanical energy). The larger generators pick up most ofthe lost power regardless oflocation. This is sometimes called “inertial” power flow. There is also some reduction in loads dueto the reducedfrequency.

During roughly the same time period, prime mover controls (gover- nors’) respond to the decaying speed and open steam-turbine valves or hydraulic-turbine gates. Prime mover controls arrest the speed and frequency decay after 3-5 seconds. The inherent response ofturbines and motors with speed-dependent loads help arrest the speed and frequency decay. Assuming oscillations have damped out, frequency is uniformly low throughout the interconnection. After 10-20 seconds, frequency has partially recovered and power redistribution is largely by prime mover control (stored thermal or hydraulic energy). All units in the interconnec- tion with active governors will participate and again the larger generators pick up most of the lost power regardless of location. This is sometimes called “governor” power flow . Governor power flow may represent the time frame oflonger-term voltage stability. Anderson and Fouad [22, Chapter 3] and Rudenberg describe the mathematics ofthe fast phenomenajust described. Prime mover control does not restore frequency to schedule (60 Hz). Prime mover control provides proportional rather than integral control. Automatic Generation Control (AGC) is the mechanism to restore frequency and net interchange power to scheduled values by integral control. AGC works overtens ofseconds andminutes.AGC maytake 10-15 minutes for very large imbalances.’ The lost power is now made up by generators in the interchange control area that experienced the loss of *An IEEE standard depreciates theuse ofgovernor“toadvancethe understanding thatcontrol systems need notbelimited torotating flyweights butinclude mechanical, hydraulic, andelectronic components.” +The NorthAmerican Electric ReliabilityCouncil(NERC)requiresthat generation lostbecoveredwithintenminutes. Utilitiesarenotalways suc- cessful inmeetingthisrequirement. = 124 Chapter5, Generation Characteristics generation (stored energy in fuel supply).

Ifthe control area does not have enough reserve generation, interchange schedules must be altered and other generators cover the loss. This is sometimes called“AGC” power flow and is the condition several minutes afterthe outage. This is the condition normally represented in power flow outage cases where area interchange control models AGC. Extension ofAGC power flow to an even longer time frame is “economic dispatch”power flow. In summary, for power flow analysis of the slower forms of voltage stability, we are interested in either governor or AGC power flow. Some- times we need to study both time frames. Power redistribution is by two completely different criteria. In governor power flow, generating plants throughout the synchronous interconnection participate. In AGC power flow, only selected generating units participate. For large generation-load imbalances, it may take many minutes for the transition from governor to AGC powerflow.AppendixC providesguidance forpower flow simulation. Example 5-3. A load area with local generation is interconnected with a large system as shown in Figure 5-9a. One of the load area generators suddenly trips. Sketch the resulting response ofthe remaining local gener- ator and the response of the system equivalent generator. Also sketch response ofsystem frequency. Solution: Figure 5-9shows the responses forthepower impactphenom- ena described above. In some situations, intentional generator tripping improves voltage stability. To keep the reactive support, fast generation runback may, instead, be used. Hydro generation tripping is often used since hydro gen- eration is easy to resynchronize and reload. Three examples from the western NorthAmerican interconnection fol- low. 1. Pacific Intertie system. The Pacific Intertie consists ofa 3100-MW, +500-kV, 1360 km HVDC line in parallel with a 3200 MW, 500-kV ac link (two or three parallel circuits per section). See Figure 5-10.

Bipolar outage of the HVDC Intertie presents a very severe disturbance to the power system, and to the parallel Pacific AC Intertie in particular. For HVDC Intertie outages, Pacific Northwest hydro generation (up to 2700 mega- watts) is tripped for three reasons: maintain transient stability, reduce overloadonAC Intertieseries capacitors, andmaintain longer-term voltage stability in Northern California. Voltage instability on the AC Intertie following loss of the HVDC intertie would probably blackout the entire Southwestern U.S. Voltage stability became a concern following a bipolar HVDC outage (1286 MW) on May 21, 1983. After about two minutes, voltage on the PO 5.3 System Response to Power Impacts 125 Tripped gen- erator Prarse Psmall — =— Tie lines Remaining area generation (small) Large system equivalent Psmall Area load (a) Time - seconds ie) 10 20 30 (b) Prarge {Inertial /— aac——___ ‘| Governor. —————_| Time - seconds 0 10 20 30 fave © \— 60 Hz Time - seconds 0 10 20 30 (d) Fig. 5-9. Power system response to power impact. We assume that the con- trol area with loss ofgeneration has enough spinning reserve to cover the loss generation. = 126 Chapter 5, Generation Characteristics Canada — Washington 4 >) Oregon f eit) : Montana Sed callers f—> Idaho ieladies we) Wyoming PacificAC Pacific = orado Intertie HVDC : Intertie San Francisco non Bay area UN 4 Intermountain a ana, Power Project Ne HVDC Link PacificAC —_ Southern fue |) <a California ee Fig. 5-10. Schematic of western North American interconnection and Pacific Intertie system. 500-KkVintertie north ofSan Francisco decayed to380kV(0.76 pu). Voltage recovered after pump motors ataqueduct stations tripped. Intripping Pacific Northwest hydro generation, redistribution ofgener- ation by prime mover control or AGC becomes critical. The more power picked up in the southern partofthe system, the better the voltage stabil- ity.

Ideally, AGC at the southern end should make up for the lost HVDC import within about two minutes. (This could possibly be done by special fast power changes at pumped hydro stations and at the Hoover Dam hydro plant.) 2. The British Columbia, Canada system includes remote generation sites on the Peace River and Columbia River. Outages ofkey 500-kV lines between the remote generation and the Vancouver load area threaten longer-term voltage stability . B.C. Hydro is strongly connected to the U.S. system—bytwo500-kVactransmissionlines pluslowervoltagelines. 5.4 Power Plant Response 127 Following line outages, tripping remote generation on the appropriate river system would relieve heavily loaded lines with high reactive power losses. The generation tripped would largely come from the much larger U.S. system—first by governor power flow and then by AGC schedule changes. Power normally flows north to south, from the Vancouver area to the Seattle area; the generator tripping would cause the power to reverse, and the power supply from a strong source would maintain voltage stabil- ity. (This control is notimplemented.) 3. As described in Chapter 7, the Puget Sound area in the Pacific Northwest has longer-term voltage stability problems associated with heavilyloaded 500-kVtransmission lines running eastto westfrom Colum- biaRivergeneration inEastern Washington state tothePuget Sound area. Following 500-kV line outages, tripping (or run-back) of Columbia River generation would relieve heavily loaded lines and improvevoltage stability, particularly if the lost power could be delivered on lightly loaded north/ south lines intothe Puget Sound area. This could involve, forexample, fast increase ofBritish Columbia hydro generation. (This control is not imple- mented.) 5.4 Power Plant Response We have hinted about needs to rapidly increase generation to aid longer- term voltage stability. Often the fastpower changes must be made within a few minutes.

We are in a race with load restoration by tap changing and with generator current limiting. Recalling Figure 1-5, transmission line reactive power consumption increases nonlinearly with real powerloading increases. Wethuswanttounloadheavilyloadedlines,bringingpowerinto the load area on lightly loaded lines. Generation should be increased in areas where theincreasedgeneration does notcause reduction ingenerator reactive power capability at critical locations. Figure 5-11 shows the situa- tion schematically. Small generation changes by governors are quite fast—a few seconds. Weare nowinterested in how fastlarge changes canbemade byeithercon- ventional AGC, or by special generation controls used to preserve voltage stability. We will present basic concepts and provide references fordetailed descriptions. Hydro plant response. Large changes can be made quite fast at hydro generation. Response rates of 10-20% of capacity per minute are often quoted. Reference 25 describes a phase-plane controller installed at Hun- gry Horse power plant in Montana. Figure 5-12 shows a 75-MVA Hungry Horsegenerator goingfrom noloadto full load in about one minute. “= 128 Chapter 5, Generation Characteristics Increase Generation generation area Heavily = Lightly loaded (iN loaded Generation \_ites fg e lines Tripor rampdown Start gas Increase generation turbines generation Fig. 5-11. Concepts ofimproving voltage stability bygeneration changes. 100 . = Generation response = 80 = 60 s Sample period = 1 second Bg 4 Deadband = 3 MW oO 20 20 40 60 80 100 120 Time in seconds 3 Speed level motor commands FE 5 by = ° a Fig. 5-12. Simulation (analog computer and actual digital controller) of Hungry Horse response at 100 MW/minute loading rate. © 1973 IEEE . | | 5.4 Power Plant Response 129 Thermalplantresponse.

Response ofspinningreserve at thermal plants depends on several factors: type of fuel, type of boiler (drum versus once-through), number of reheat stages, type of control (boiler following versus turbine following versus coordinated control). Response rates for 10-20% power changes of 2-3% of capacity per minute are often quoted. Largerchanges require additional auxiliary units (coal mills, etc.). The rate limits are notonlydue to process lags but also due to permissible limits on temperatures, pressures, levels andcorresponding stresses . With care- ful equipment tuning and testing, a maximum rate ofincrease of 10% per minute might be achieved. Substantial improvement in voltage stability could be achieved with spinning reserve carried on several fast responding units. Typical responses have been shown in several papers and reports [26-30]. Figure 5-13 shows typical response from an EPRI report. Recently there has been concern on deterioration ofprime mover control . One Power output Boiler-following-turbine change i Turbine-following-boiler Coordinated control Note: Response ofoil- orgas-fired unit is fasterand smootherthan coal-fired unit. 3~4 minutes Time Throttle pressure Turbi . . change fo urbine-following9-boiler tL Time Boiler-following-turbine Coordinated control Fig. 5-13. Response forthreetypesofboiler-turbine controls . “— 130 Chapter5, Generation Characteristics reason cited is increased use ofsliding pressure control, which is similarto the turbine-followingcontrol shown on Figure 5-13. There are special methods which may be implemented to achieve rapid power plant increase [32,33]. These include substantial throttling reserve, and temporary closure offeedwater heater extraction valves.

Termuehlen and Gartner described a combination of these methods to achieve a 20% load increase in less than one minute (Figure 5-14). °o 80 Yyi;SLLLTLLLiZAL2 Closure of the final é Yl feedwater heater 75 SF extraction valve 5 f Coe = ey Closure ofthe LP © Eller S feedwaterstop valve oO Ny 20% throttle reserve of e SS the HP control valves 2@ 65 e Variable pressure operation with 60 N immediate fuel flow increase WSS 1 2 3 4 5 Time - minutes Fig. 5-14. Sustained fast unit load increase from 60% to80%, utilizing vari: ous methods. © IEEE, 1980 . Gas turbine response. Gas turbines can be brought on line and loaded relatively fast during an emergency. Time from cold start to full load is 5-20 minutes. On May 20, 1986, a major voltage collapse in England was avoidedby bringing 1000 megawatts of gas turbines on line following loss of six 400-kV circuits during a thunderstorm. The gas turbines were brought on line in five minutes . Modeling ofpowerplantresponse. Longer-termdynamicprograms such as the EPRI ETMSP incorporate low-order models of energy supply systems (i.e., boilers, nuclear reactors, and combustion turbines). Models are described in references 29 and 30. 5.5 Automatic Generation Control(AGC) 131 5.5 Automatic Generation Control (AGC) We conclude this chapter with a brief description ofautomatic generation control in interconnected power systems. More detailed descriptions are available elsewhere, cf., references35 and36. AGC is sometimes taken to include both load-frequency control and economic dispatch. We discuss only the faster load-frequency control which acts to maintain scheduled system frequency and scheduled net power interchange. Following a largedisturbance (generation loss),AGC actsdur- ing a slowly developing voltage instability. As discussed above, the time frame is roughly 0.5 to 15 minutes following the disturbance. The power redistribution is based on an entirely different criterion than the faster governorredistribution.

AGC is a decentralized control operating in each control area. Acontrol area generally corresponds to the service area ofan individual utility. By decentralized, we mean that no signals are received from other control areas; the control is based on tie line power flow measurements and local system frequency measurement. Control isusually digital with 1-4 seconds compute cycle time. Areafrequencyresponse characteristic. The combined response ofgov- ernors andloads in an areato a power impactis termed the area frequency response characteristic. Governor responses are nominally based on steady state droop settings. Load responses to frequency excursions are due mainly tomotor loads asindicatedbythePfparameterinEquation 4-1 and Table4-1 (we often term the load response damping). There is also turbine damping becauseofthe effect ofabnormal speed on the steam orhydraulic torques operatingon turbine blades. The area frequency response characteristic, AP/Aw, has the symbol 8 andis given by: B= 1 +D (5.1) : R where R is composite governor droop ofall generators in the area andD is composite load damping. If all units had active governors with 0.05 per unit droop, the 1/R term would be 20 per unit. The D term is normally much lower, 1-2 perunit. Thusgovernorresponse dominates the frequency recovery following generation loss. Since a drop in frequency (negative frequency deviation)results ingeneration increase, fis anegativenumber. The area frequency response characteristic is routinely calculated at control centers following loss of generation in other control areas. The equation is: —— 132 Chapter5, Generation Characteristics B = AP net int 6. 2) meas Ao . where AP...in, is the measured net change or deviation in tie line power flow and Aqis the measured change in system frequency (speed). The tie line power and the frequency measurements are made after primary prime mover control (governor) action is largely complete, and the system is temporarily quiescent.

On Figure 5-9d, this is around fifteen seconds after the powerimpact. From these routine calculations performed many times per year, the area responses have been found to be much less than expected from nomi- nal governor droops. The overall eastern North American synchronous interconnection frequency response corresponds to about a 16% droop equivalent governor. The overall western North American interconnection frequency response corresponds to a 9-10% droop equivalent governor. The poorperformances are due to block-loaded generators, governor deadbands and other nonlinearities, and very slow (turbine-following) prime mover control. The better performance ofthe western interconnection may be due to a larger proportion ofhydro units with active governors. Related to Equation 5.2, the system frequency or speed after prime mover control action is due to the frequency response characteristics ofall control areas in the interconnection. We can write: Ao = AP (5.3) XA, 7 where APis the generation loss. Example 5-4. The western North American interconnection capacity is about 100,000 MW. The generation loss is 1000 MW, or 1% ofthe intercon- nection capacity. Assuming the interconnection frequency response charac- teristic is -10 per unit (corresponding to 0.1 per unit or 10% droop equivalent governor), calculate the expected system frequency deviation aftergovernor action. Solution: Using equation 5.3, we calculate: Af 0.01 = (60) Tan * 7-006Hz. Figure 5-15 shows actual western system response following 1000 MW generation loss on June 16, 1988. The frequency recovery is close to calcu- lated valueof-0.06 Hz. | 5.5 Automatic Generation Control (AGC) 133 60.00 -0.06 Hz ® 59.95 oO £ > 1) Cc & 3 & 2 59.90 59.85 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 Time -seconds Fig. 5-15. System frequency response ofloss ofJim Bridger units 1 and 2 (1000 MW) in the state ofWyoming.

Recorded at Bonneville PowerAdmin- istration control center in Vancouver, Washington at 1040 hours on 16 June 1988. Area Control Error. The basicAGC algorithm calculates anArea Control Error based on pseudo steady-state concepts, namely that AGC is much slowerthan governoraction. Theequation is: ACE = AP ootint —BAF (5.4) whereB isfrequency bias and is anegative number. TheACE sign conven- tion is opposite the convention in control engineering—a positive ACE means lower generation. Internal loss ofgeneration will cause both right hand side terms to be negative, resulting in negative ACE and commands toraise generation. TheACE is divided up among generatingunits accord- ingtoparticipation factors. From quasi steady-state analysis, perfect control for a power impact (step change in generation or load) results ifB =f in all control areas. By perfect control, we mean thatACE= 0 in all control areas except the area with the power impact; the ACE in the disturbed area is initially equal to the power impact. In external areas, the BAf term prevents premature undoing ofgovernor assistance to the area suffering the generation loss. 134 Chapter 5, Generation Characteristics Governor assistance gradually diminishes as frequency is returned to schedule. Usually frequency bias is set only once per year based on calculated (measured) area frequency response characteristic during peak load condi- tions. For most disturbances, this results in some overcorrection and unnecessary control action. After some power exchanges, the power changes in external areas willbe zero andthearea with the generation loss will havecompletely covered the loss. Example 5-5. For a two area system, show that perfect control action results with B = 8. Show that unnecessary control action occurs with B = 2B. The sketch below showsthe model.

P, (~) — Remainder of Tie lines interconnection By Control area 1 Control area 2 After governor action and with AP a negative value, the tie line power will be: AP B, retint = SPareaz = BB Using Equation 5.3, the frequency will be: AP Af"=B=B—>,- ForB = p: ACE, B, AP 1 = - Bz—B, AP- a8,,s—,, = -AP and References 135 ACE, B, AP’ +5, BSB, 0 Similarly forB = 2f: ACE, B, AP 2B, +B, = 5g AP-igeg = -AP( Bp) ACE B, AP B, 5g. o? 2p ep, ~ ~*P(aE) = Voltage instability usually occurs during heavy load conditions. We see that only small temporary generation increases will be made in external areas. This is completely different from “governor” powerflow which is due tofrequency response characteristics ofareas. Emergency actions, AGC suspension or rescheduling. For large disturbances, thearea sufferingthegeneration losswillnotbeable tocover the loss and power interchange schedule changes will be made. Forvoltage stability, the additional power import should be scheduled over lightly loaded lines. AGC may be suspended for major disturbances. For example, a large frequency change indicates electrical islanding; AGC should nottry to con- trol interchange over tie lines that may be open. AGC may be suspended based on direct detection ofoutage ofa major tie line. Finally, AGC maybe suspended for intentional generation tripping; for voltage stability, this preventsAGC from undoing thegeneration tripping. An alternative toAGC suspension for detection oftie lie outages or for intentional generator tripping is rescheduling ofpower interchanges, keep- ingAGCin service. As described above, special fast generation control may aid voltage stability. Automatic Generation Control facilities may be used for this emergency control. References 1. B. M. Weedy,ElectricPowerSystems,Third Edition,JohnWiley &Sons, 1979. 2. A. E. Fitzgerald, C. Kingsley, Jr., and S. D. Ulmans, Electric Machinery, Fifth Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1990. 3. P. Kundur,PowerSystem Stability andControl, McGraw-Hill, 1993. 4. H.

M. Rustebakke, editor, Electric Utility Systems and Practices, Fourth Edi- tion,JohnWiley&Sons, 1983. | 5. A. Capasso and E. Mariani, “Influence ofGenerator Capability Curves Repre- sentation onSystemVoltage andReactive PowerControl Studies,”JEEETrans- ) wa 136 Chapter5, Generation Characteristics actions on PowerApparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-97, No. 4, pp. 1036-1041, July/August 1978. 6. W. R. Lachs, “System Reactive Power Limitations,” IEEE/PES paper A 79 015-9,IEEE/PES WinterMeeting, 1979. 7. CIGRE Task Force 38-02-10, Modelling ofVoltage Collapse Including Dynamic Phenomena, 1993. 8. A. Calvaer, “Voltage Stability and Collapses: a Simple Theory Based on Real andReactiveCurrents,”RevueGenerale del’electricite, No. 7, pp. 1-17, Septem- ber 1986. 9. P. B. Johnson, S. L. Ridenbaugh, R. D. Bednarz, and K. G. Henry, “Maximizing theReactive Capability ofAEPGeneratingUnits,”ProceedingsoftheAmerican PowerConference, pp. 373-377,April 1990. 10. A. S. Rubenstein and W. W. Walkley, “Control of Reactive KVA with Modern Amplidyne Voltage Regulators,” AJEE Transactions, pp. 961-970, December 1957. 11. A. S. Dehdashti, J. F. Luini, andZ. Peng, “Dynamic Voltage Control by Remote Voltage Regulation for Pumped Storage Plants,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 3,No. 3, pp. 1188-1192,August 1988. 12. S.Koishikawa, S. Ohsaka,M. Suzuki,T.Michigami,andM.Akimoto, “Adaptive Control ofReactive Power SupplyEnhancingVoltage Stability of aBulk Power Transmission System and a New Scheme of Monitor on Voltage Security,” CIGRE,paper38/39-01, 1990. 13. D. Brandt, R. Wachal, R. Valiquette, and R. Wierckx, “Closed Loop Testing ofa JointVARControllerUsinga Digital Real-Time Simulator,”IEEETransactions onPowerSystems, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 1140-1146,August 1991. 14. R. Wachal, D. P. Bradt, and R. Valiquette, “Dorsey HVDC Station Joint Var Controller, A Programmable Controller Project,” Proceedings of the Third HVDCSystem Operation Conference, Winnipeg, pp. 133-138, 2-15May 1992. 15. J. P.

Paul, C. Corroyer, P. Jeannel, J. M. Tesseron, F. Maury, and A. Torra, “Improvements in the Organization ofSecondary Voltage Control in France,” CIGRE, paper38/39-03, 1990. 16. V.Archidiacono, S. Corsi, A. Natale, C. Raffaelli, and V. Menditto, “New Devel- opmentsintheApplicationofENELTransmission SystemVoltageandReactive PowerAutomatic Control,” CIGRE, paper38/39-06, 1990. 17. J.P. Piret, J. P.Antoine, M. Stubbe,N.Janssens,andJ.M. Delince, “TheStudy of a Centralised Voltage Control Method Applicable to the Belgian System,” CIGRE, paper39-201, 1992. 18. M.S. Baldwin and D. P. McFadden, “Power System Performance asAffectedby Turbine-Generator Controls During Frequency Disturbances,” IEEE Transac- tionsonPowerApparatus andSystems, Vol. PAS-100,No. 5,May 1981. 19. IEEE CommitteeReport, IEEEGuideforACGeneratorProtection, ANSVIEEE C37.102-1987. 20. IEEE Std. 122-1985, IEEE Recommended Practice for Functional and Perfor- mance Characteristics ofControl Systems for Steam Turbine-Generator Units, IEEE, 1985. 21. M. Lotfalian, R. Schlueter, D. Idizior, P. Rusche, S. Tedeschi, L. Shu, and A. Yazdankhah,“Inertia,Governor, andAGC/EconomicDispatchLoadFlow Simu- lations of Loss of Generation Contingencies,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus andSystems, Vol. PAS-104,No. 11, pp. 3020-3028, November 1985. | References 137 22. P. M.Anderson andA.A. Fouad,PowerSystem ControlandStability, TheIowa StateUniversityPress,Ames, Iowa, 1977. 23. R. Rudenberg, Transient PerformanceofElectricPower Systems:Phenomena in Lumped Networks, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1950. (MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1967.) 24, IEEE CommitteeReport, VoltageStabilityofPowerSystems:Concepts,Analyti- cal Tools,andIndustryExperience, IEEE/PES90TH0358-2-PWR, 1990. 25. D. N. Scott, R. L. Cresap, R. F. Priebe, D. E. Tehrink, and K. A. Takeuchi, “Closed Loop Digital AutomaticGeneration Controller,” IEEE/PES paper C 73 518-8, 1973. 26.

IEEE Committee Report, “MW Response ofFossil Fueled Steam Units,”JEEE TransactionsonPowerApparatusandSystems, Vol. PAS-92, No. 2,March/April 1973. Reprinted in reference 28. 27. C. Concordia, F. P. de Mello, L. K. Kirchmayer, and R. P. Schulz, “Effect of Prime-MoverResponseandGoverningCharacteristics onSystem Dynamic Per- formance,” Proceedings ofthe American Power Conference, 1966. Reprinted in reference 25. 28. IEEE Committee Report, Symposium on Power Plant Response, IEEE publica- tionTH0105-7-PWR, 1983. 29. IEEE Committee Report, “Dynamic Models for Fossil Fueled Steam Units in Power System Studies,”IEEETransactions onPowerSystems, Vol. 6,No. 2, pp. 753-761, May 1991. 30. Ontario Hydro, Long-Term Dynamic Simulation:Nuclear and Thermal Power PlantModels,EPRI Final Report TR-101765, December1992. 31. EPIC Engineering, Inc., ImpactsofGovernorResponse Changes ontheSecurity ofNorth American Interconnections, EPRI Final Report TR-101080, October 1992. 32. H. Termuehlen and G. Gartner, “Sustained Fast Turbine-Generator Load ResponseinFossil-Fueled Power Plants,”JEEE Transactions on Power Appara- tusandSystems,Vol. PAS-100, No. 5, pp. 2495-2503,May 1981. 33. Power Technologies Incorporated, Technical Limits to Transmission System Operations, EPRI FinalReportEL-5859. 34. M. G. Dwek, Study Group 38 discussion, Proceedings of33rd CIGRE Session, Vol. II, 1988. 35. A. J. Wood and B. L. Wollenberg, Power Generation Operation and Control, John Wiley &Sons,NewYork, 1984. 36. F.P. deMelloandJ. M.Undrill,“AutomaticGenerationControl,”IEEETutorial Course 77TUDO010-9-PWR. Reprinted inreference 28. = Simulation of Equivalent Systems Seek simplicity—and distrust it. Alfred North Whitehead. We have described characteristics and modeling of power system equip- ment. Nowweusethe models forsimulation. This chapterdescribes steady state and dynamic simulation ofsmall equivalent systems. These systems provide considerable insight into voltage stability phenomena.

Results are easily tractable. The first system has an infinite source and only load and reactive power compensation effects are studied. Both load and generation effects are studied in the second example. Before starting this chapter, you may wish to look at Appendix C, PowerFlow Simulation Methodology. 61 EquivalentSystem 1: Steady-State Simulation Figure 6-1 shows the equivalent system. A 600 MW load is served from a large system over two 230-kV lines, each 113 km long. Generator current limitingis notconsideredbecauseoftheinfinite source system assumption. The system is heavily stressed and heavily shunt compensated—possibly because ofdifficulty in building newtransmission lines. The load is half motor and half resistive. The voltage at the load is controlled by an LTC transformer. The resistive load is constant energy (thermostatically controlled). The motor load is 80% shunt capacitor compensated. The receiving-end 230-kV bus has additional shunt compen- sation. Steady-state simulation. Using quasi-dynamic analysis, we compute V-Q curves at different points in time. The points in time are before and 140 Chapter 6, Simulation ofEquivalent Systems SOURCE REC Pabiied 230-|KV 230-kV LOAD - OB AV 500 MVAbase | Ld (M) 300 + j200 MVA em | x Cs (TC 300 MW +10% Transmission lines 500 MVAbase T Tiss MVAr Fig. 6-1. Equivalent system 1. Two 113 km, 230-kV lines deliver 600 MWto load that is halfinduction motor (80% shunt compensated) and halfresis- tive. Priortooutage ofa line, SOURCE andREC busses are at 1.05 per unit voltage, and the LOAD bus is at 1.0 per unit voltage. after outage ofone ofthe 230-kVlines. Theoutage severely stresses thesys- tem andboth stability and thermal limits are approached. Because of the motor load, the analysis is highly approximate—but instructive. Section 6.2 describes more exact dynamic analysis. Figure 6-2 shows the V-Q plots computed using a power flow program. Five system characteristics are shown.

The receiving-end 230-kV bus is the test bus for the fictitious synchronous condenser. Three shunt capacitor bank characteristics are shown. The system characteristics are: 1. Characteristic (1)—pre-disturbance system. Point A, the inter- section ofthe system characteristic and the 153 MVAr capacitor bank characteristic, is the operating point. The test bus voltage is 1.05 perunit. Voltage atthe load is held to 1.0 perunitby the LTC transformer. 2. Characteristic (2)—immediately following the outage. The induction motor load initially has an impedance characteristic. PointB is theoperating point. 3. Characteristic (3)—prior to LTC control. Constant real poweris now assumed forthe motor. 4. Characteristic (4)—after LTC control. For voltages below about 0.9 per unit, the LTC is at maximum boost limit and the resis- tive load is voltage dependent. = 6.1 Equivalent System 1: Steady-State Simulation 141 500 J 400 2 Oneline, constant loads c (thermostatic control) (5) ES 300 ™~™ 4 £ One line, with LTC (4) Zi; o FA 200 Switch additional Lf, >8 SYw2i5tMchVAadrditional LZ 8 IK = 100 75 MVAr — & ZZ 153 MVAr Oo -- One line, w/o LTC (3) capacitor wu 0 One line, initial motor _ bank response (impedance) (2) -100 Two line system with LTC (1) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 REC 230-kV voltage - pu Fig. 6-2. V-Q curves for outage ofone line and for several time frames. 5. Characteristic (5)—load is constant because of LTC and ther- mostatic control. Transient voltage stability is a problem. We barely have an operating point (intersection ofsystem characteristic (3) and the 153 MVAr capacitor bank characteristic). The operating point near 0.7 per unit voltage is unaccept- able and the motor would stall. Ifthe disturbance involved a short circuit, collapse would beveryfastas the motor wouldnotreaccelerate. Switching a shunt capacitor bank on could at least temporarily pre- serve stability.

The switching needs to be fast because the transition from system characteristic (2) to characteristic (3) takes only a few seconds. Switching a 75 MVAr capacitor results in a temporary operating point at PointC near one per unit voltage. Voltage at the load is below normal. Col- lapse would occur in a minute or two since system characteristic (4) does not intersect the capacitor characteristic. Switching a 125 MVAr capacitor bankon stabilizes the systemnear Point D, but voltage would be high. Dynamic simulation is needed to determine capacitor bank sizeandthe switching speed. Considerations include short circuit disturbances, perfor- = 142 ~=Chapter 6, Simulation ofEquivalent Systems mance for various operating conditions, high voltage problems, and whetherornot the source systemis completely stiff. Figure 6-2 shows that an intersection of system and capacitor bank characteristics between 1.0 and 1.05 per unit voltage is not well defined. A better solution is necessary. Solutions include a load-area generator, a syn- chronous condenser, or a static varcompensator. For the same system characteristics, Figure 6-3 shows application ofan SVC. Following the outages, the operating point would immediately move from Point A to Point B. Within a few cycles, however, the system would stabilize near Point C. The response ofthe SVC is faster than the motor dynamics. Very little tap changing results and the operating point is well defined. Retaining the 153 MVAr fixed capacitor bank, the SVC control range should be about +150, -50 MVAr. 6.2 EquivalentSystem 1: Dynamic Simulation We now simulate the line outage andcapacitorswitching using a transient stability program. Transient voltage/motor stability will be studied, includ- ing the effect of short circuits on motor reacceleration.

The motor equiva- 400 & One line, constant loads 2 300 (thermostatic control) (5) N € 2 oS 2 200 a ° Oneline, with LTC (4) g A 8B z 100 SVC at capacitive limit_ fi SVC S 3 & oO 0 One line, w/o LTC (3) ia One line, initial motor response (impedance) (2) —T Four line systemwith LTC (1) — -100 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 REC 230-kV voltage - pu Fig. 6-3. V-Q curves for outage of one line and for several time frames. Application ofstatic var compensator. 6.2 Equivalent System 1: Dynamic Simulation 143 lentcorresponds tothe small industrial induction motor listed in Table 4-1. The equivalent circuit and other parameters are repeated in Table 6-1. Table6-1 i oSee “soar [ox [aa [aos [ois | ov | 1 | o6 | The equivalent circuit parameters are in per unit on the base of the equivalent motor which is 500 MVA. LF is the load factor of300 MW/500 MVA. A = 1 means the load torque is proportional to the square of the speed. The equivalent motor represents many motors that respond similarly to transmission system disturbances. Maintaining stability with a high proportion ofmotor load and a weak transmission system is difficult. The stability limit foreven non-faultdisturbances maybe lowerthan the static powertransferlimit. Torque-speed curves. Before describing time domain simulations we can assess stability by torque-speed curves. Torque-speed curves are usually given for constant motor terminal voltage. This is appropriate for studying a single motor fed from a strong power system. In our case, however, the aggregated orequivalent motor seesa fixed voltage only atthe infinite bus. In computing the torque-speed curves, the thévenin equivalent circuits shownon Figure 6-4apply. Thethévenin circuits are based onthe Figure 6- 1 system and the motor equivalent circuit. The 300 MW resistive load equivalent is part ofthe thévenincircuits. Torque is calculated fordifferent values ofslip. . Furthermore, results with equivalent motor modeling should be inter- preted cautiously.

A single stall-prone motor (heavily loaded, low inertia, constant torque load) at the end ofa long feeder could stall and cause cas- cade stalling ofothermotors. Figure 6-5 shows the torque-speed curves. Curves for three conditions are shown: 1. Fixed motor terminal voltage (for referenceonly); 2. Two line pre-disturbance system; and 8. Outage of one line, additional 125 MVAr capacitor bank switched in. We see that motor stability margin is very low even in the pre-disturbance system. This is the direct consequence ofthe point offixed voltage being at the far end ofvery heavily loaded transmission lines. A small increase in 144 Chapter6, SimulationofEquivalentSystems 0.9687 ; | 0.0291 j0.2772 0.018/s (a) Thévenin equivalent with motor terminal voltage fixed at one perunit. 1.10 | 0.1009 j;0.6185 0.018/s (a) Thévenin equivalent for two line system. 1.321 | 0.3488 J;0.9215 0.018/s (a) Thévenin equivalent for outage ofone line and with additional 125 MVArcapacitor bank. Fig. 6-4. Thévenin equivalents lookinginto system from motor rotor. Source system shown on Figure 6-1. Base power is the 500-MVAmotor rating. the motor load, or increase in motor load factor would cause instability. We can also imagine a short circuit deccelerating the motorto a speed whereit does not reaccelerate following fault clearing. Note the small inertia constant of 0.7 MW-seconds/MVA. Regulation of load end voltage by an SVC or synchronous condenser would, ofcourse, improve the torque-speed characteristic. Dynamic simulation for three types ofreactive compensation. The motor representation is the third order dynamic model described in Chap- ter 4. We apply a three-phase faultat the midpoint ofone line. The faultis cleared in four cycles by permanently opening the line. Stability is mar- ginal.

We simulate three cases with different reactive power compensation applied atthe REC 230-kVbus: 1. 125 MVAr mechanically switched capacitor inserted 0.1 sec- onds after faultclearing. | 6.2 Equivalent System 1: Dynamic Simulation 145 1.5 Motor terminal voltage fixed> 51 a @ Two line_ sL . torque—— F _- _ — = _———__ 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Speed - per unit Fig 6-5. Torque-speed curves ofequivalent induction motor for the théve- ninequivalent circuits ofFigure 6-4. 2. +125 MVAr, -75 MVAr static var compensator. A50 millisecond first order lag represents the principal dynamics. A2% slope is used corresponding to dynamic gain of50 per unit. 3. 125 MVAr synchronous condenser. The machine parameters are taken from reference 2. A powerful static excitation system is used. Line drop compensation is used for fast regulation of the REC 220-kV bus. (Both the SVC and synchronous con- denser regulate the 230-kV voltage.) Figure 6-6shows voltage atthe REC 230-kVbus forthe three cases. All cases are stable. We make the following remarks. | * The MSC is the least expensive option but has important per- formance disadvantages. Stability margin is smaller than the other options and high voltage results in the post-disturbance steady state (as predicted by the V-Q curves). Transmission line reclosing would cause high temporary overvoltages until the capacitor bank is switched off. The switching time is critical—there is notimeto waitfor a reclosing attempt. * The SVC is blocked duringthe fault on period, butimmediately goes to full capacitive boost after fault clearing (in some SVCs there is delay of perhaps 30 milliseconds in deblocking after = 146 = Chapter 6, Simulation ofEquivalent Systems 1.2 + Synchronous condense_r_ go8 =ss Static var compensator oo. Mechanically switched capacitor 8 06 ° 2 0.4 8 0.2 0 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 Time - seconds Fig. 6-6. Voltage recovery for three-phase midpoint fault with permanent line outage. Three reactive power compensation options. fault clearing).

Output remains at full boost until voltages recover. Response is fast and well damped. SVC dynamics are faster than the induction motor dynamics. Final output is about 100 MVAr, providing 25 MVAr of reserve in the boost direction. ¢ The synchronous condenser provides slightly greater stability margin than the SVC. The fault voltage dip is reduced and the substantial temporary overload capability is used. Because of synchronous machine time lags and inertial swings, the response is more oscillatory than the SVC option. The synchro- nous condenser response speed is similar to that ofthe induc- tion motor. Similar dynamic interaction would occur if generators were represented. The SVC is more cost-effective because oflower life-cycle costs. References 3, 4, and 5 report somewhat similar transient voltage stability studies ofinduction motors andstatic varcompensators. 6.3 EquivalentSystem 2: Steady-State Simulation Figure 6-7 shows a more complicated equivalent system . Two loads are feed from a 500-kV bus in the load area. Industrial load is served directly via a LTC transformer. Residential and commercial load is served via two LTC transformers and an equivalent for subtransmission impedance. The load areais heavily shunt compensated. The load area also includes a 1600 MVAequivalent generator. | 6.3 Equivalent System 2: Steady-State Simulation 147 Gen 1 X=0.20n 1094 MW 5000 MVA 5000 MVAbase 500-kV, = cen3 3566MW —500-kV / 500-kV 5000 MW EO)1600 MVA —- LA OF+ ——t" | a 18 Industrial load 1500 — ] 3000 MW, MW FP ch 1800 MVAr ~<a a (~) =a te x L__Fy 1500 MVAr Gen 200 km T 2 Z=0.03 + j0.1 on 2200 MVA 115-kV / 3300 MVAbase T c | Residentialand 868 LTIC3 Mar LIC 2 300 T commercial load MVAr 3000 MW Sendingarea Loadarea Fig. 6-7. Equivalent System 2. Two remote generators deliver5000 MWto the load area overfive 500- kVlines. AppendixE provides the steady-state and dynamic data for Equivalent System 2.

Base conditions for power flow simulations are: ¢ LTCs 1 and 8 are automatically controlled to regulate the low- side voltage. LTC 2 has fixed tap. Continuous rather than dis- crete taps are modeled forthe LTC transformer equivalents. ¢ The industrial load active power is constant. The reactive power isconstant current (Q « V'). ¢ The residential and commercial load is unity power factor. Half of the load is constant and half is resistive For small voltage changes this is the same asa constant current characteristic. ¢ All generator voltage regulators control terminal voltage. Gen- erators are initially operated near unity power factor. The combined load isvoltage insensitive—75%constant and 25% resistive. Thisis onerous forvoltage stability. Since mostofthe loadis motor, steady- Oo” 148 ~—Chapter 6, Simulation ofEquivalent Systems state analysis must be used with caution and results should be confirmed bydynamic analysis. In this section weanalyze important aspects oflonger-term voltage sta- bility using an available conventional power flow program models (PV/PQ bus generator representation). We first describe outage cases at different load levels. We then show results and sensitivities from computation of V-Qcurves. Outage ofone line. The contingency is a 500-kV line outage. We assume transient stability and examine longer term steady-state behavior. Let’s do some bookkeeping: the effect ofthe line outage before LTC and area inter- change control is: *¢ The load-end 500-kV bus voltage drops from 540 kV to 529.5. kV. ¢ The reactive powerconsumption ofthe 500-kVlines increase by 652 MVAr. ¢ The reactive power consumption of the transformers and the subtransmission equivalent increaseby20 MVAr ¢ The output ofthe shunt capacitor banks decrease by 75 MVAr. This includes the net effect ofthe industrial reactive load and its compensation. * Reactive power output ofGen 1, Gen 2, and Gen3 increase by 192 MVAr, 234 MVAr, and 319 MVAr respectively.

The total increase of 745 MVAr equals the reactive power loss increase and shunt capacitor bank output reduction. It’s easier to keep track ofthe generator reactive power. ¢ The load decreases by 62 MW, but the active power losses increase by 18 MW. The effect oftheline outage after LTC and area interchange controlis: ¢ Theload-end 500-kV bus voltage drops from 540-kV (basecase) to 528.9 kV. * The reactive powerconsumption ofthe500-kV lines increase by 716MVAroverthebasecase. ¢ The reactive power consumption of the transformers and the subtransmission equivalent increase by 47 MVAr ¢ The outputofthe shunt capacitor banks decrease by 54 MVAr. ¢ Reactive power output ofGen 1, Gen 2, and Gen3 increase by 222 MVAr, 255 MVAr, and 338 MVAr respectively. The total increase of815 MVAr equals the reactive power loss increase and shuntcapacitor bank output reduction. ! 6.3 Equivalent System 2: Steady-State Simulation 149 Loadand transferincreases. To stress the five line system, we increase the residential/commercial load, dispatching generation from Gen 1. The load increase is half constant and halfresistive at unity power factor. We then take an outage ofoneline. Wetest system robustness forthe firstcon- tingency by applying a 100 MVAr constant load atthe residential/commer- cial load bus. The 100MVAr load allows us tocompute sensitivities tosmall changes. Figure 6-8 shows the resulting P-V curve for increase in load and transfer. The ordinate is the load area 500-kV bus voltage. This bus feeds both loads. Curves are shown forthe five line system with LTC control, the system with outage before LTC control, and the system with outage after LTC control. Forall threeconditions, areainterchange control is active. Point D at 5400 MW transfer (line outage with LTC control) is an unacceptable operating point. The 500-kV voltage has dropped 20 kV(4%) because ofthe outage. More importantly, Gen3 is at its reactive limit and Gen 2 is only 114 MVAr away from its limit.

LTC3 is atits limit. Applying the 100 MVAr load causes power flow divergence. At Point D, the angle between Gen 1 and Gen3 is 29.4°. 550 z S540 Five line base system 3 5304 Lineoutage e S | > A w/o tapchanging i z 3 520 B : ©c 88 we © 510 Line outage with tapchanging rs . S 500 5000 5100 5200 5300 5400 5500 Power importto load area - MW. Fig. 6-8. Effect of increasing residential and commercial load with power import from sending area. For each base case load level, a one line outage contingency is simulated with and without tap changing. For outage with- out tap changing, power flow diverges for 5500 MW transfer. For outage with tapchanging, power flow diverges for5450MWtransfer. ~— 150 Chapter 6, Simulation ofEquivalent Systems Sensitivities. Sensitivities for small changes can be computed. Although some powerflow programscompute some sensitivities from asolved caseas an output option (Appendix B), we run additional cases so that any sensi- tivity may be determined. We apply a constant (voltage insensitive) 100 MvVaAr load at the residential/commercial load bus and note the changes from the previous case. Bus, branch, and generator sensitivities (participa- tions) can be computed. Generator reactive power sensitivities are particu- larly interesting. For the 100 MVAr load additions, Table 6-2 shows the sensitivities for PointsA, B, C, andD ofFigure6-8. ForPoint C, a 10MVAR loadadditionis used, since a 100 MVAR addition causes Gen3 to hit its reactive limit and alsocauses LTC8 to hit its tap limit. For Point D, a 10 MVAr load addition allows power flow convergence. Table6-2 AVineds00-kv | AQGen1 | A@cene | AQGens | A@centotal AQtoaa AQroad SQtoad AQroad AQioaa | [[PoiPnto|in-0.t03"A| 0.332 0.386 0.911 1.629 inc | 0.03 | 0058 | osm | 096s | 1.729 [Point | 000 [ose [ow [i | ase a. D> [ora | 156 | ser | oo | ae | kV/MVAr b. Gen3 at reactive powerlimit, LTC 3 at boost limit. c.Gen3 atreactivepowerlimit.

The last column is the total change in generator reactive power forthe load change. This is the Voltage Collapse Proximity Indicator, VCPI, intro- duced in Chapter 2 (Example 2-3). For Point D, 3.37 MVAr ofreactive gen- eration is required for each additional MVAr of load at the residential/ commercial load bus. Once Gen3 is at its reactive limit, the VCPI will increase rapidly—theoretically to infinity at the maximum power point. Since, at Point D, LTC3 is at its boost limit (load is voltage sensitive), the VCPI increase from Point C is moderate. From Point A to Point D, the VCPI approximatelydoubles. V-Q curves. V-Q curve computation is automated in powerflow programs such as EPRI’s VSTAB program. Sensitivities tomodel andcontrolchanges over a wide range ofstress levels are rapidly computed. The load area 500- 6.3 EquivalentSystem 2: Steady-State Simulation 151 kV bus is the test bus for stressing the transmission system. This is the onlytransmission system bus in the load area. Points are computed at five kV intervals between 475 and 545 kV. All cases are for 6000 MW ofload and 5000 MW of imports. Area interchange control is active except as noted. V-Q curves—reference case, outage of one line. One of the 500-kV lines is out-of-service. This reference case has LTC transformers 1 and 3 controllingvoltage. LTC transformer2isoperatingwith fixedtap.Allthree generators control terminal voltage. Figure 6-9 shows the V-Q curve and the 868 MVAr capacitor bank characteristic. Also shown are the reactive power outputs ofthe three generators. Gen 3 reaches its reactive power limit of700 MVAr ata scheduled volt- age of515 kV. Gen 2 reaches its reactive power limit of725 MVAr at 490 kV. LTC1 is atlimit at500 kVand LTC3 is atlimit at495 kV. The change in V-Q curve slope when Gen 3 reaches its reactive power limit is espe- ciallynotable. Because part ofthe load becomesvoltage sensitive with LTC 30n limit, the V-Q curve does notreach a minimum and turn upward.

Theoperating pointis theintersection ofthe V-Q curve andthecapaci- tor bank characteristic. The reactive power margin from the operating point to the flat part ofthe V-Q curve is about 700 MVAr. 2000 2000 = 1500 Gen 1 = 1500 S>s =2 Two l.inesout 5 10004 capacitor> — + 1000 —_ 3 a 8 Capacitor 8 \ 8 One line out c 0 Gen 3 c 0 V-Qcurve, -500 LTCs 1& 3active Five line system -600 4- 475 500 525 550 475 500 525 550 Load areavoltage - kV Load areavoltage - kV Fig. 6-9. V-Q curve and generator Fig. 6-10. V-Q curves showing reactive power outputs for outage _ effect ofline outages. ofoneline. ~S >| 152 Chapter 6, Simulation ofEquivalent Systems V-Qcurves—effectoflineoutages. Figure6-10 shows V-Qcurves forno outage, outage ofone line (reference case), and outage oftwo lines. In all three cases, LTC transformers 1 and 3 are controlling voltage. The case with outage of two lines is unstable since there is no intersection ofthe capacitorbank curve and the V-Q curve. V-Q curves—load representation. Figure 6-11 compares three load rep- resentations: 1. Reference case with LTC 1 and3 in active control. 2. Prior to LTC and area interchange control. The residential/ commercial bus is voltage sensitive (halfresistive). 3. The resistive load at the residential/commercial bus is con- trolled to be constant (e.g., thermostatic control). All load is constant. Because 75% ofthe load is constant without LTC or thermostatic con- trol, there is nota great difference between the three cases. With constant loads, the reactive support forthe portion ofthecurve to the left ofthe critical voltage (bottom ofcurve) is interesting. Although not shown, the 500-kV transmission system supplies an increasing amount of reactive power as voltage is lowered. The subtransmission reactive power losses and the reduction of capacitor bank output are increasing faster, however, than the transmission system supply.

This causes the curve to turn upward atlow scheduled voltages. 2000 2000 < 1500 = 1500 >2 == 3 1000 Capacitor _ _~-— 1000 Capacitor — #-— F —_—— g ae &a $s 500 A @ 500 A g s Ct $s {S Ts gs tS a 0 Constant power [va (0) LTC3active _ LTC 1 &3active te ' &3active Before tap changi active re tap changing -500 -500 475 500 525 550 475 500 525 550 Load area voltage - kV Load area voltage - kV Fig. 6-11. V-Q curves showing Fig. 6-12. V-Q curves showing effect ofload control. effect ofLTC transformers. 6.3 Equivalent System 2: Steady-State Simulation 153 V-Q curves—LTC transformer control. Figure 6-12 compares different combinations of LTC transformer control. Voltage stability is improved if LTC2 is active rather than LTC 3. LTC2 control supports the 300 MVAr shunt capacitor bank output and reduces subtransmission losses. Voltage stability is degraded with LTC1 inactive. This is because the industrial load shunt compensation is notsupported (see Example 4-7). V-Q curves—sending end high side voltage control. Figure 6-13 shows the improvement ofvoltage stability if Gen 1 and Gen 2 regulate high side voltage rather than terminal voltage (reference case). Improve- mentisquitesignificant overthe entire range ofscheduled voltages. This is acost-effective method ofimproving voltage stability. V-Q curves—effect ofsubtransmission representation. In large scale simulations, the subtransmission/distribution system is usually not repre- sented. For constant power loads, Figure 6-14 shows the optimistic results from neglecting the subtransmission and distribution equivalent. The case with subtransmission system istheconstant powercaseofFigure6-11.

The case without subtransmission has the power flow at the secondary ofthe 500/115-kV transformer converted to a constant load. 2000 2000 Terminal = 1500 voltage = 1500 <x < S control > — SS 1000 Capacitor. — - 3 1000 Capacitor —-f— 3 aa i@) 500- @ 500 g So $ x 3 w/feeder © 0 Gen 1 andGen 2 = 0 wiofeeder impedance -500 control high side impedance -500 475 500 525 550 475 500 525 550 Load areavoltage - kV Load area voltage - kV Fig. 6-13. V-Q curves showing ben- Fig. 6-14. V-Qcurves showing opti- efitofhigh side voltage control. mistic results by neglecting the equivalentforsubtransmission and distribution systems. ~ 154 Chapter6, Simulation ofEquivalentSystems 6.4 Equivalent System 2: Dynamic Simulation We now simulate longer-term dynamics using the EPRI ETMSP 3.0 pro- gram. Asdescribed inAppendix E, the industrial loadis represented bytwo equivalent motors. One-half of the residential/ecommercial load is repre- sentedbyanequivalentmotor. Theotherhalfis resistive withthermostatic control, i.e., constant energy load. Arather short time constant ofsixtysec- onds is arbitrary used forthis load. Referring to Figure 6-7, LTC 3 controls the voltage at the residential load. The LTC model is shown on Figure 4-28. The delay time is thirty sec- onds and the mechanism time is five seconds. Discrete tap steps of5/8% each are modeled. The bandwidth is +0.00833 per unit corresponding to 2 volts on a 120 volt base. All other transformers have fixed tap. Again referring toFigure 6-7, Gen 3 has anoverexcitation limiter(field current limiter). The field current limit is adjusted to a value (2.17 per unit) that results in voltage instability and voltage collapse. The other gen- erators do nothave overexcitation limiting represented. Figures 6-15 to 6-18 show simulation results for an outage ofone 500- kV line at ¢t = 5 seconds. Figure 6-15 show bus voltages in the load area.

Synchronizing swings damp rapidly and the voltages are nearly constant from about ¢ = 12 seconds until ¢ = 35 seconds. Voltages are, however, decaying slightly because ofresistive load added by thermostatic control. At t = 35seconds tap changing begins at LTC 3. Tap changing raises the residential/commercialload voltagebutlowers the other voltages.Afterfive taps, the residential/commercial load voltage is within the bandwidth. The system is now quiescent for about the next fifty seconds. Then something happens. Voltages decay and LTC 3 taps seven more times until itreaches its boostlimit. Voltages collapse. Figure 6-16 shows the causeofthe voltage collapse. Gen 3 field current is slightly above thefieldcurrent limiter setting forabout fifty-five seconds, butthen is limited at t = 110 seconds. The resulting reduction in reactive power of Gen 3 lowers the residential/commercial load voltage, causing more tap changing. Once LTC3 is atits limit, load is addedbythermostatic control. The requiredadditional reactivepowermustcome from the remote generators and the transmission system. This is not effective and instabil- ityresults. Figure 6-17 shows thecorresponding reactive power outputs ofthegen- erators. Field current limiting reduces Gen 3 reactive power by about 55 MVaAr. Figure 6-18 show Gen 2 and Gen3 rotor angles relative to Gen 1. Syn- chronous stability is not a problem. In fact, as the load is collapsing, the Gen 3 angle ismovingtoward the sending-end generators. | 6.4 Equivalent System 2: Dynamic Simulation 155 s eet| 1 Re on ow side| = 5 ee Industrial = 30.9 Res./Comm. 115-k' ee IN ei e———> $08 \ . | | [| ft | 0.7 0 60 120 180 240 300 Time - seconds Fig. 6-15. Load area voltages foroutage ofone 500-kVtransmission line. 3 ee —s5 . [7 z 2 ee £ en2 ° 315 ir 1 0 60 120 180 240 300 Time - seconds Fig. 6-16. Generator field currents for outage ofone 500-kV transmission line. Field current limitingon Gen 3.

Sensitivity analysis shows that generator voltage regulator line drop compensation at Gen 1 and Gen2 provides considerable stability improve- ment. This confirms the static results shown on Figure 6-13. Ideally, the linedrop compensation should beadjusted so thatallgeneratorsreach cur- rent limits atthe sametime. ~—S 156 Chapter 6, SimulationofEquivalent Systems 1500 2 = 4000 |__| — | 500 aa LL Pee 6 a & : fed 0 0 60 120 180 240 300 Time - seconds Fig. 6-17. Generatorreactive power foroutage ofone 500-kV line. Fieldcur- rentlimiting onGen 3 at 110 seconds. g 10 8 8 ot sje 210 A ———__|__, & -20 7 pol |ptt | 5B ao ee oe ot | | o © -40 0 60 120 180 240 300 Time - seconds Fig. 6-18. Generator angles relative to Gen 1 foroutage ofone 500-kVline. For a similar power system model, references 6 and 7 provide addi- tional results. References 1. C. W. Taylor, “Concepts ofUndervoltage Load Shedding forVoltage Stability,” IEEETransactionsonPowerDelivery,Vol. 7,No. 2, pp.480-488,April 1992. References 157 2. C.V.ThioandJ.B. Davies,“NewSynchronous CondensersfortheNelson River HVDC System—PlanningRequirementsandSpecification,”JEEETransactions onPowerDelivery,Vol.6,No. 2, pp. 922-928,April 1991. 3, A. E. Hammad and M. Z. El-Sadek, “Prevention ofTransientVoltage Instabili- ties due to Induction Motor Loads by Static VARCompensators,” JEEE Trans- actionsonPowerSystems, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 1182-1190,August 1989. 4. A. Edris, “Controllable Var Compensator: a Potential Solution to Loadability Problem ofLow Capacity Power Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Sys- tems,Vol. PWRS-2, No. 3,pp. 561-567,August 1987. 5. R.L. Hauth,S.A.Miske, Jr., F. Nozari, “TheRole andBenefitofStatic VarSys- temsinHighVoltagePowerSystemApplications,”JEEETransactions onPower ApparatusandSystems, Vol. PAS-101,No. 10, pp. 3761-3770, October 1982. 6. G. K. Morison, B. Gao, and P.

Kundur, “Voltage StabilityAnalysis UsingStatic and Dynamic Approaches,” paper 92 SM 590-0 PWRS, presented at the 1992 IEEE/PESSummerMeeting,Seattle,Washington,July 12-16, 1992. 7. CIGRE Task Force 38-02-10, ModellingofVoltage Collapse IncludingDynamic Phenomena, 1993. . Voltage Stabil=:ity of a Large System Inlearningthesciences, examples areofmore use thanprecepts. SirIsaac Newton In this chapterwe describe approaches by a group ofutilities to solve volt- age stability challenges in the major load areas ofthe Pacific Northwest. Interrelated voltage stability problems exist from Vancouver, British Columbia to the Puget Sound (Seattle-Tacoma) area to the Portland, Oregon area. Although we focus on the Puget Sound area, reference 1 describes approaches byB. C. Hydro to analyzevoltage stabilityin the Van- couver load area. B. C. Hydro is removing voltage stability limitations by series capacitorand static varcompensator additions. The Pacific Northwest load areas are winter peaking and, because of large amounts of electric space heating, the loads are weather sensitive. Voltage instability is most likely during periods ofcold or abnormally-cold weather, coupled with outages ofkey 500-kV transmission lines or major generatingunits. Following discovery ofserious voltage stability problems in the rapidly growingPuget Sound area, an intense effort wasundertaken byBonneville PowerAdministration and otherarea utilities to find solutions. Since solu- tions could involve new 500-kV transmission through the environmentally- sensitive Cascade Mountains, all possible alternatives were explored . Alternatives to new transmission included reactive power compensation, load-area generation, and additional energy conservation and load man- agement measures. We concentrate on widely applicable electric power engineering issues such as study methods, system testing, transmission system design, reactive power compensation, and power system controls.

Voltage stability problems inthePuget Sound area fortheextremecon- tingency ofloss ofall transmission through a mountain pass (perhaps due = 160 Chapter 7,Voltage Stabilityof a Large System to an avalanche) were known in the 1970s. Dynamic simulations showed that voltage would collapse prior to islanding and frequency collapse. Problems for single contingencies were discovered in 1987 for near-future operating conditions. Intense study ofthe problem started in 1988. Refer- ring to Chapter 2, the delayed recognition ofthe problem maybe explained by Example 2-1 which describes development ofvoltage stability problems in mature powersystems. The voltage stability challenge came at a time of very active industry worktounderstand the many aspects ofthe phenomena, and atatimewhen specialized study tools and methodology were notwell developed. 7A System Description The Puget Sound area peak winter load is around 11,000 MW. Peak winter loads are forecast for an annual minimum temperature with one in two years probability. Duringextremely cold weather (one in twenty years prob- ability) loads are about 1000 MW higher. For Seattle, the one in two year minimum temperature is -8°C (17°F), and the one in twenty yearminimum is -17°C (2°F). Loadgrowth is 200-400 MW/year. The main source of generation, around 8000 MW, is Columbia River hydroelectric generation on theeast sideofthe Cascade Mountains inWash- ington state. Figure 7-1 shows major transmission facilities. The cross-Cascade Mountain transmission consists of five 500-kV lines, plus several lower voltage lines. The northern corridor (mountain pass) consists ofone 500-kV line (ChiefJoseph—Monroe) and two 345-kV circuits. The southern corridor includes four 500-kV lines terminating at the Raver switchyard approxi- mately 40 km southeast of Seattle. Two of the southern lines are double- circuit and series compensated (Grand Coulee—Raver 500-kV lines). Amid- dlecorridorcontains one 345-kVline.

The Puget Sound areaisconnectedby north-south 500-kV transmissiontotheVancouverareaand tothePortland area. The major power plant in the Puget Sound area is the Centralia coal- fired plant (2 x 811-MVAunits) in the extreme south. The 1280-MVATrojan nuclear unitis still farther south, closer to Portland. The major transmission contingencies that threaten voltage stability are outages ofthe ChiefJoseph—Monroe 500-kV line and ofthe high capac- ity Grand Coulee—Raver double-circuit 500-kV lines. The generation outages that threaten voltage stability are outage ofthe entire Centralia plant or (more probably) outage ofone unit with the other unit offline, andoutage oftheTrojan nuclear plant. | 7.2 Load Modeling andTesting 161 — ke A British Columbia \ ff Vancouver ae HNene AA Washington aes \ approx. 100 km ( | a Chief Grand \ \ Monroe A Joseph. Coulee _/ eattle A” 7, y Mule, Vi Vay —=4 Tacoma Olyymepsia Rave=r XQ « As — : Paul Schultz MlfCentralia A i Cascade — a Mountains tan, Trojan A p Allston) Cotumbia Fj, i \ River “ A ' a Y Keeler nay 4 J Oregon PacificAC Salem = “_Intertic\ Hlintertio Fig. 7-1. Pacific Northwest 500-kVtransmission system. 7.2 Load Modeling and Testing Superbase case and load modeling. Puget Sound area utilities devel- oped a“superbase” power flow basecase withgreatly expanded representa- tion of the subtransmission system. Western Washington and western Oregonloads arerepresented atover700 busses; theloadsareregulated by LTC transformers. The entire western interconnection is represented. The total number ofbusses is about 5000, approximately half ofwhich are in the British Columbia, western Washington, andwestern Oregon areas. A large effort was made to improve load models for power flow and dynamic programs. The EPRI LOADSYN program described in Chapter 4 was used. Utility-derived load compositions were used in place of LOADSYN default data.

The average load bus voltage sensitivity (prior to _ 162 Chapter 7, Voltage Stability of aLarge System control action) is about P« V'*. The incremental load above the base load (used for example in producing a P-V curve) is temperature-dependent electric heatingresistive load. Table 7-1 showsoverall winter load composi- tion . Table 7-1 ea | Residential loads Electric space heating 3244 4306 Electric water heating 1307 Commercial/institutional loads Heating, ventilation & air conditioning 1859 Electric lighting 755 Industrial loads Total load 11400 12500 A key question in the voltage stability analysis is load modeling. Should loads simply be represented as constant power as seen from trans- mission orsubtransmission busses? The loadmodelingquestion iscomplex: forexample, duringheavy load, tap changers maybenear boostlimits with limited range for voltage and load regulation following an outage. Some utilities (Seattle City Light in the Puget Sound area) don’t use tap chang- ingequipment forvoltage regulation. The superbase casewas developed essentially forsensitivity analysis of load modeling. For development oftransmission plans for later years, nor- mal representation (less subtransmission system) may be used, with the assumption ofconstant powerloads. 7.2 LoadModeling andTesting 163 Load testing. Several methods were used to understand load behavior. Duringabnormallycold weatherinFebruary 1989 and December 1990, tap changer tap positions were noted. On average, a regulating margin remained to correct about a 6% voltage drop. System tests were also per- formed to measure load response following a voltage drop. Figure 4-34 showsa test result atPortAngeles on the Olympic Peninsula. During January and February 1991, two large-scale tests were per- formed to observe load behavior for the entire Puget Sound area. Under controlled conditions, the two Grand Coulee—-Raver 500-kV lines were opened sequentially to drop system voltage. The lines are 280 km long.

Also, a 180-MVAr, 500-kV shunt reactor was energized at Raver. For the teston February26, the switchingdropped Raver voltage by22 kV(-4.1%). The voltage dropped another 4 kV during the next two minutes as voltage- sensitive load was restored. The weatherwas mild forthis test. Load tap changer (LTC) transformer responses were monitored at many substations. Figures 7-2 and 7-3 show measurements at a suburban 115-kVsubstationjust southofSeattle. The active andreactive power mea- surements are for a 115/12.5-kV LTC transformer (12/16/20 MVA rating). The load is estimated at 73% residential and 27% commercial. From the LOADSYN program (for heavy load, cold weather conditions), AP/AV = 1.64 perunit/per unitand AQ/AV = 2.33 perunit/per unit. Figure 7-2 shows response from one minute before the outages until fourteen minutes after the outage. Figure 7-3 shows response from ten seconds before the outage until 120 seconds after the outage. The outages andreactorswitchingdropped the 115-kV voltage by about 4kV(measured at about 70 seconds, see Figure 7-3a). The corresponding drops in load power were 0.5 MW and 0.164 MVaAr. Based on the predisturbance values, the per unit voltage sensitivities are: AP _ 0.5/9.18 av > 4772 = 1% AQ _ 0.164/2.2 av ~ a7niz2 ~ 278 Starting about forty seconds after the first outage, the voltage decayed another 1.2 kV as loadwas restored by tap changing. The voltage recovery betweenthree andfourminutes is probably due to high sidevoltage control atgeneratingplants. Approximately forty seconds aftertheline reclosures, voltage slowlyincreased as tap changing reduced load. On Figure 7-3b, the tap positions are indicated (L means lower, R means raise). The time delay setting is 30 seconds.

This time delay is “= 164 Chapter 7, Voltage Stability ofa Large System > 116 | | Reclose line 2 —— & 114 sg i Reclose line 1 > 112 ee 110 ee ee ee 0 5 10 15 Time - minutes 9.5 ; st] nN Paar handy : \ . ° © 2 8.5 0 5 10 15 Time - minutes _ 23 < => i 22a CO \s yp f\ 3 AW | wr = a S24 © 2 0 5 10 15 Time - minutes Fig. 7-2. Puget Sound area tests on February 26, 1991. Measurements ata 115-kVsubstation south ofSeattle. shown (we assume the timer relay is energized after the second line out- age). Between 99and 122 seconds, the transformer taps from position 4Lto 2R (6 steps of5/8% each). The mechanism time from an even numbered 7.2 Load Modelingand Testing 165 118 =e [TTT nl 116 i 2414 fete Nanna: Reactor on CO 8 40 nes ee 110 | | | fo | (a) 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 Time - seconds 9.5 > (b) = 4L mech. ra time| gf |TT RL pedo ye aes a 3s wan |r | 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 ) Time - seconds _ 2.3 < => C) g 22m La] Poo o 224 |perial ieee : inal cy Neate thence 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 Time - seconds Fig. 7-3. PugetSound area tests on February 26, 1991. Measurements at a 115-kVsubstation south ofSeattle. Tap positions are shownonFigure 7-3b. position to an odd numbered position is about eight seconds and the time from anodd position to an even position is abouttwo seconds. TheWesting- house T& D book describes several types oftap changer equipment. ~—S 166 Chapter 7, Voltage Stabilityof a Large System Because over 30% of the load is electric space heating and other heating, response was tested by reducing voltage on several feeders with electrically heated homes. Results, however, were inconclusive because of mild weather during the test periods. With temperatures above 0° C, load restoration bythermostatic control was notobserved. 7.3 Power FlowAnalysis Most ofthe system design by the Bonneville PowerAdministration was by steady-state power flow analysis. Many power flow program enhancements aided the voltage stability studies.

In particular, the V-Q curve technique was automated andbecame the workhorse method. Deterministic design criteria. Value-based (probabilistic) calculations showed that the joint probability ofa major outage and peak load condi- tions is very, very low. Furthermore, the consequences ofa voltage emer- gency could be mitigated by undervoltage load shedding and other low- costcontrol measures. Because theloads are inherently highly voltagesen- sitive, slowly-developing voltage collapse would likely resultin abnormally low voltages rather thana total blackout. Stable operation at low voltage allows time for manual actions including load shedding. With abnormally low voltages, tap changers would be at boost limits, but thermostatically controlled andotherconstant energyloads may be slowlyincreasing. Nevertheless, utilities decided to use traditional deterministic design criteria. The system is designed to be stable with margin fora first contin- gency during abnormally heavy loads (once in twenty years cold weather) and for a second contingency for normal peak loads (once in two years cold weather . The system is also designed to serve the load demanded at nominal voltage, and all voltages are required to bewithin specified limits. The most limiting condition is usually the double-circuit Grand Coulee- Raver outage during normal peak loadconditions. Design(planning) andoperating criteria are furtherdiscussed inChap- ter9. Voltage stability solutions. Basedon powerflow simulation (mainly V-Q curves as describedbelow), two new 500-kVswitchyards andmanyreactive power compensation additions were identified. This postpones new line construction.

For initial reinforcements, the following equipment is added (refer toFigure 7-1). ¢ Three 152-MVAr, 230-kV mechanically switched shunt capaci- torbanks (atthree Puget Sound area substations). ¢ One 316-MVAr, 500-kV mechanically switched capacitor bank atMonroe. 7.3 PowerFlowAnalysis 167 ¢ One +300 MVAr static var system connected to the Maple Val- ley 230-kV bus. The Maple Valley 230-kV bus is connected to the 500-kV bus by a 1600-MVA transformer. A cross-Cascade Mountain 345-kV line also terminates atthisbus. *¢ New 500-kV switchyard at Echo Lake. This reduces the electri- cal distance between Raver and Monroe caused by looping the Raver—Monroe line intoMapleValley. * Two 316-MVaAr, 500-kV mechanically switched capacitor banks atEcho Lake. ¢ Line drop compensation (50%) atthe Centralia and Grand Cou- lee power plants, and fast high side voltage control at the Grand Coulee, ChiefJoseph, Bonneville, The Dalles, and John Dayhydroelectric power plants along the Columbia River. * Other 500-kV MSCs anda static var system in the Portland area. Alarge new 500-kV switchyard (Schultz) is added along the southern corridor about 130 km east of Raver. All four 500-kV lines will be looped into the switchyard. Outage of the double circuit line (Schultz—Raver or Schultz—Grand Coulee)becomes much less severe becauseoftheintermedi- ate switchyard. Series compensation is planned at Schultz on the four Raver lines (initially only on the high capacity double circuit line). In a ten yeartime frame, a new high capacity transmission line maybe needed. This will probably be a double-circuit, series compensated 500-kV circuitin eitherthe northern or middle corridor. The new line reduces peak losses by around 100 MW, and relieves severe overloads during outages. Several other transmission line and transformer additions are also required in this time frame. V-Q curves.

V-Q curves computed for the Raver 500-kV bus were usedto rapidly assessPuget Sound area bulk system voltage security.Atthis node, four heavily loaded 500-kV lines from generation areas to the east termi- nate.Afifth 500-kV line runs to the north anda sixth 500-kV line runs to the south. Three more 500-kV lines serve Tacoma area loads. There are alsothree 500-kVshunt capacitorbanks atRaver totalingover 1000MVAr. For conditions prior to voltage stability related reinforcements, Figure 7-4 shows the Raver V-Q curve for three load conditions following the Grand Coulee—Raver double circuit outage. The three cases are: 1. Voltage sensitive loads—this represents a snapshot in time prior totap changing, perhaps 30 seconds following the outage. 2. Voltage sensitive loads with discontinuous tap changing—for the lower voltages at Raver, tap changers are at boost limits and the loads arevoltage sensitive. 168 Chapter 7, Voltage Stabilityofa Large System 1200 Pd 1000 = 3banks > _——~ Constant = —_ power < 800 2 —_—— 8 2 banks _— _ < 600 —_— 2 3 FA 400 + bank fp —4+-- 5 © _-— Voltage 200- Voltage sensitive sensitive with tap changing 0 475 500 525 550 : Ravervoltage - kV Fig. 7-4. V-Q curve for the Raver 500-kV bus. Outage of Grand Coulee- Raverdouble circuit 500-kV line. Superbase casewithreduced load levels. 3. Conventional constant powerload representation. This approx- imates a point in time when thermostats and manual actions have controlled constant energytype loads. Remaining voltage sensitive loads such as lightingare treated asconstant. Figure 7-4 also shows the V-Q characteristics ofthe three Raver shunt capacitor banks. The intersections ofthe capacitor bank and system char- acteristics are possible operating points. For the constant power load assumption thereis very little stability margin. Figure 7-5shows the V-Q curvewithloadgrowthandwiththenetwork reinforcements except for the Schultz switchyard. Constant power loads are assumed.

Note that the critical voltage for the Grand Coulee—Raver outage is 525-kV. The most severe case is the Grand Coulee—Raver outage during normal peakloads. Figure 7-6 shows the V-Q curve for the ten year time frame with the Schultz switchyard. The most severe disturbance is now the ChiefJoseph- Monroe 500-kVoutage with extra heavy loadlevels. | 7.4 Dynamic Performance Including Undervoltage Load Shedding 169 1600 Chief Joseph- 1400 Monroeoutage < 1200 ® CRoauvleere- h = outage < 1000 Ss 3banks & € 800 @ 8 \ Ij © 600 5 wy, & 400 / | 200 Trojan outage 0 475 500 525 550 Raver voltage - kV Fig. 7-5. Raver V-Q curve with network reinforcements. Grand Coulee— Raver double circuit outage fornormal peakloadconditions. ChiefJoseph— Monroe and Trojan outage forextra heavy load conditions. Constant power loads. For the cases shown on Figures 7-4 and 7-5, a 500 MVAr reactive mar- gin from the operating point to the bottom ofthe constant power V-Q sys- tem characteristic is required. This margin allows for unavailability of a Raver, EchoLake, orMonroe 316MVArshunt capacitorbank, orthe Maple Valley SVC. The margin also allows for other uncertainties such as higher loadlevels. Forthesehighly stressed outage conditions, twoorthree mega- var ofreactive support might be required for each additional megawatt of load. 74 Dynamic Performance Including Undervoltage Load Shedding While system additions were based mainly on V-Q curves and constant power loads, dynamic simulation provides a more realistic picture of system voltage stability. V-Q curves artificially stress a key transmission ~~ 170 Chapter 7, Voltage Stabilityof a Large System 2000 ChiefJoseph- 1800 Monroe outage Trojan & 1600 outage —_ > = 1400 3c dSocuhbulletzc-iRracuvietr / ‘8 1200 outage _ F £3S 1080000 a3 banks e! 3 R = 7 ~ 400 rN , et ee 475 500 525 550 Raver voltage - kV Fig. 7-6. Raver V-Q curve for ten year time frame. Schultz—Raver double circuit outage for normal peak load conditions.

ChiefJoseph—Monroe and Trojan outage forextra heavy load conditions. bus and do not simulate actual operating points. V-Q curves at Raver pro- vide only a crude approximation ofthe dynamic performance and voltage security of the geographically-large Puget Sound area. For wintertime conditions with voltage sensitive loads, Figure 2-14 shows that assuming constant power loads is notrealistic unless there is a requirement to serve the load demanded atnominal voltage. Reference 4 reports initial dynamic simulation results, including undervoltage load shedding, using a conventional transient stability pro- gram. We now describe results using the EPRI ETMSP 3.0 program for extended dynamic analysis. The ETMSP simulation program includes models for underload tap changing, for thermostatically-controlled heating loads, and for generator field current limiting. Asuperbase power flow case is used. The simulated system comprises 4960 busses, 8898 branches, 411 generators, 573 induc- | 7.4 Dynamic Performance IncludingUndervoltage Load Shedding 171 tion motors, 719 under-load tap changing transformers (discrete taps with limits and deadband), 729thermostaticallycontrolled loads, andabout fifty undervoltage load shedding relays. To save computer time, the thermostat- ically-controlled loads are assumed to have a time constant of only sixty seconds; a 20% increase inconductance is allowed. Seven majorgeneratorshaveoverexcitation limitersmodeled. TheCen- traliaPowerPlant andtheGrand CouleeThird Power Plant have linedrop compensation represented. Both power plants connect to the 500-kV net- work, andcompensation inbothcases is 50% ofthe step-up transformers. The 15% of area load with undervoltage load shedding represents about 1800 MW ofarea load . The Puget Sound area load shedding pro- gram, implemented in December 1991, is as follows: 1. 5% ofarea load is shed at a voltage 10% below lowest normal voltage.

Thetime delayis 3.5 seconds. 2. 5% of area load is shed at a voltage 8% below lowest normal voltage. The timedelayis5 seconds. 3. 5% of area load is shed at a voltage 8% below lowest normal voltage. Thetime delay is 8 seconds. Extra-heavy loads are represented with the system additions described inthe previous sectionnotincluded. Figures 7-7, 7-8, and 7-9 show large-scale time domain simulation results of two minute duration. The disturbance is outage of the Grand Coulee—Raver double circuit 500-kV line loaded at 2866 MW. This severe disturbance is outside the deterministic planning criteria for the extra- heavy load conditions represented. Figure 7-7 shows selected 500-kV voltage. After synchronizing swings have damped out, there is some voltage decay prior to tap changing because ofincrease inthermostatically-controlled resistive load. Because of thevery severe disturbance, there is also some undervoltage load shedding prior totapchanging—which starts after thirty seconds. Atthe end ofthe simulation, some 500-kV voltages are 0.96 perunit or 480 kV which is about 10% below normal. Most under-load tap changing transformers reach their boost limits, and eleven of the thermostatically controlled loadsreach their maximum value. Figure 7-8showsselected unregulated 115-kVvoltages. Regulated volt- agesontheload side ofLTC transformersaregenerally boosted by 10%. Figure 7-9 shows field current at important generators. After time delay, field current limiting is enforced at the Trojan and Grand Coulee generators. Centralia is near its maximum field current, but load shedding _ has prevented significant overload during the simulation duration. = 172 Chapter 7, VoltageStabilityofa Large System 5 We Paul be g a TEE s Monroe | $ 0.9 2 . °o B 0.8 r — + 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Time - seconds Fig. 7-7. Raver, Monroe, and Paul 500-kV bus voltages for outage ofthe Grand Coulee-Raver double circuit 500-kV line loaded at 2866 MW.

The drops involtage are duetotap changing andtherises are duetoundervolt- age load shedding. The amount ofundervoltage load shedding is 686 MW and 187 MVAr, with shedding oftwelve blocks ofload. Although voltages areabnormal, the system is stable andsecure.About 1100 MW ofundervoltage load shedding remain in reserveto protect againstunexpected transmission line orpower plant relaying causedbythe abnormal conditions. In the simulation world, thereserve undervoltage loadshedding “protects” against modellingerrors. One or two 500-kV shunt capacitor bank additions would improve system performance. Sensitivity cases show that generator line drop compensation installed at the Centralia power plant and the Grand Coulee third power plant significantly reduces the amount of undervoltage load shedding. For the outage described, the line drop compensation reduces load shedding from 1040MWto686 MW. Final voltage levels are similar forboth cases. A case without load shedding also is stable, but probably not secure. Voltages atthe 500-kVlevel are about20%belownormal, andmajor gener- ators have field current limited with stator current overloads. The system is stable becauseofthehighvoltage sensitivity ofelectricheatingandother load once tap changers are at boost limit, and all thermostatically- - controlled electric heatingload is connected. 7.4 Dynamic Performance Including Undervoltage Load Shedding 173 11 3 8 g stheee (——Lowen 2Zao9 Via ee see cae a|| g » Sh UR EE EE South W - = Snohomish 0.8 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Time - seconds Fig. 7-8. Selected 115-kV bus voltages for outage of the Grand Coulee Raver double circuit 500-kV line loaded at 2866 MW. The drops in voltage are due to tap changing and the rises are due to undervoltage load shed- ding. 3 Ie ni 5 2.5 iia — - = HWinn — Trojan : = € 2 NS — ~ o . | | a | 1 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Time - seconds Fig. 7-9.

Fieldcurrent atCentralia, Trojan, ChiefJoseph andGrandCoulee for outage ofthe Grand Coulee—Raver double circuit 500-kV line loaded at 2866 MW. The Grand Coulee and ChiefJoseph generation are units con- nected to the 500-kV system. Field current limiting is enforced at Trojan andChiefJoseph. 174 Chapter 7, Voltage Stability ofaLarge System Theworst casewithin the deterministic planningcriteria, outage ofthe Chief Joseph to Monroe 500-kV line loaded at 1594 MW, is stable. Load shedding is 196 MW and 50 MVAr. Voltages at the 500-kV level are about 8% below normal. Although several additional shunt capacitor banks are effective (i.e., cost effective) and would eliminate the need for load shed- ding, the more expensive additions do not seem necessary for the near term. 75 Automatic Control of Mechanically Switched Capacitors The Puget Sound area mechanically switched capacitor banks (MSCs) are controlled by dispatchers, and by local voltage-based controllers. For the Raver 500-kV Banks 2 and 3, Tables 7-2 and 7-3 show the voltage control- lersettings. Table 7-2 Cutin#1 Delay Cutin #2 Delay kV seconds kV seconds BaverBenks | say [os | oo |e | Table 7-3 Cutout#1 Delay Cutout#2 Delay kV seconds kV seconds © Raver Bank 3 555 10 | 5 | 5 | These settings have been used for several years without undesirable operations. Generally, the 520 kV setting is 10-20 kV or 2-4% below pre- disturbance bus voltage and, following a major disturbance, they may not be energized until significant load hasbeen restored by tap changers. More sensitive automatic control methods are desirable to energize capacitor banks at a higher voltage—before tap changing causes significant voltage decay. We describe a new methodforcentralized control ofcapacitorbanks. Premise. A key to voltage security is maintaining sufficient fast-acting reactive power reserves at critical generating units and at static var com- pensators.

Shunt capacitor banks are switched to allow near unity power 7.5 AutomaticControl ofMechanically Switched Capacitors 175 factor operation ofgenerators and SVCs during normal conditions (preven- tive control). Following major disturbances, capacitors banks are switched to restore the fast-acting reactive reserves (corrective control). The follow- ingpertains mainly tocorrective control following large disturbances. Voltage control strategy for voltage stability. At generating plants, transmission (high side) voltage is maintained near maximum level by line drop compensation or by automatic high side voltage control. This is local control with infrequent changes in scheduled high side voltage from the control center; fast centralized control isnot necessary nor desirable. The Maple Valley SVC controls 400 MVArof230-kV capacitor banks at Maple Valley. Local control of the capacitor banks by the SVC will help maintain SVC reactive power reserves following severe disturbances. Again, central control is not necessary nor desirable. The remaining question is how to obtain fast, sensitive control ofother mechanically switchedcapacitor banks. Automatic control ofmechanically switched capacitors. Bonneville Power Administration is considering an automatic voltage and reactive power control system for both normal and emergency conditions. The fast emergency control is based on local voltage measurement augmented by remote signals from change ofreactive power output at generating plants and SVCs. Inspired bythe microprocessor-based substation voltage/reactive power controller developed by Tokyo Electric Power Company , Figure 7-10 showsa possible substation controller characteristic for a substation such as Monroe that has both 500-kV and 230-kV capacitor banks, and a 500/ 230-kV LTC autotransformer. Appropriate switching is ordered after accu- mulated kV-seconds outside the deadzone reachesa setvalue.

TheV,,,, sig- nals from a central controllerbiases thelocal voltage measurements. For the example that follows, however, we only consider control of500- kVMSCs based on accumulated (integrated) kV-seconds below 520 kV. The controllers will reset immediately if voltage rises above 520 kV due to capacitor bank switching at other locations, line reclosures, or other switching. The switchingtime delay will always be longenoughto allow an automatic line reclosure attempt. Figure 7-11 shows this simpler 500-kV MSC controller. The V,,,.599 signal comes from a central controller. | Equation 7.1 describes the central controller signal sent to the substa- tion MSC controllers. Reactive power signals are received from the Centra- lia Power Plant, the Grand Coulee Third Power Plant, and the Maple Valley SVC. These signals are passed through a washout (high pass) filter toobtain reactivepowerchange following a disturbance. The washoutfilter time constant is 2-5 minutes. Both the Centralia and Grand Coulee power bh 176 Chapter 7,Voltage Stabilityof a Large System V, 7 ax 280 | Vaso Tapto Switch decrease230- 500-kVor Vineas - KVvoltage 230-kV 230+ Vo30 3 capsoff Capacitor mm ek || zDoenaed- Sy LTC and Varin : 7 == |Switching transformer Switch500-kV Tapio |———— status or230-KV caps increase on »| 230-kV Vineas 500 4.eVis00 " - yy Vinin Vinax Vs00 - Vax500 Fig. 7-10. Microprocessor-based substation voltage/reactive power control- lerwith both 500-kV and 230-kVMSCs, and LTC autotransformer. plants are connected to the 500-kV system, and the voltage regulators of both power plants have 50% line drop compensation. Thus the changes in reactive power ofthe power plants provide sensitive indications ofdistur- bances requiring corrective action. Vaux500 = Ki AQcentratia +K2A@co5 +Ks4Quysve + U (7.1) TheU term in Equation 7.1 is available for voltage control duringnor- mal operation. Based on optimal power flow, expert system, or other meth- ods, a large value ofUwould initiate switching.

Numerical example. The example is for a case with the Maple Valley SVC out ofservice—only the Centralia and Grand Coulee reactive power signals areused. Post-disturbance power flow simulationis used represent- ingsnapshots intimeduring the firstthirty seconds following outage ofthe ChiefJoseph—Monroe 500-kV line loaded at 1495 MW. The superbase case is used. Referring to Table 7-1, extreme peak loads are represented. Loads are represented as voltage sensitive (i.e., prior to load restoration by tap changing). The significant generation-load imbalance due to the voltage- sensitive loads are compensated for by using the “governor power flow’ method. In the base case, 500-kV MSCs at Monroe and Echo Lake are 7.5 Automatic Control ofMechanically Switched Capacitors 177 Vo30 V,ux “=a s |e] 8 Vineas vg} {Ya e/a] & 500 +C)Vs00 183 z v Capacitor ;’ § ‘Switching bankstatus yy Vinin Vinex Vs00 | 520 555 Fig. 7-11. Microprocessor-based substation voltage/reactive power control- lerwith 500-kVMSC control only. available for post-disturbance switching. We will not consider control of 230-kVMSCs. Referring to Equation 7.1, the gain settings for Centralia and Grand Coulee are 0.007 kV/MVAr and 0.02 kV/MVAr, respectively (same gains used at both Monroe and Echo Lake). For both Monroe and Echo Lake MSCs, switching occurs after accumulation of 100 kV-seconds below 520 KV. Table 7-4, rows one and two, shows the base case conditions and the effectofthe outage. Theoutage drops Puget Soundarea 500-kVvoltages 2— 3%. Based on Equation 7.1, and Figure 7-11, the compensated voltage of the Monroe substation controllers following theoutage is: Vs99 = 517.0 — (0.007 x 156 +0.02 x363) = 517-8.4 = 508.6 kV Note thatthe remote signals makes the controller inputvoltage 8.4 kV lowerthgn the locally measured voltage alone.

The corresponding compen- satedvoltage at Echo Lakeusing the same gains is: Vso9 = 514.7 — (0.07x 15+ 06.02 x363) = 506.3 kV Ignoring synchronizing oscillations and other transients, the time to accumulate 100kV-seconds below 520kVforEcho Lake is: 178 Chapter 7, Voltage Stability ofa Large System t = 100/ (520- 506.3) = 7.3 seconds Thecorrespondingtime forMonroe is: t = 100/(520-508.6) = 8.8 seconds ; Echo Lake is the first MSC to be energized bya circuit breaker with five cycle closing time . The third row ofTable 7-4 shows the results of the switching. Thecompensated voltage oftheMonroe MSC is now: Vs00 = 524.1 - (0.007 x92+0.02 x267) = 518.1 kV At7.3seconds(time ofEcho Lakeswitching), theMonroecontrollerhas accumulated 83.2 kV-seconds. The time for the Monroe MSC energization is: t = 7.3+ (100 - 83.2) /(520-518.1) = 16.1 seconds Note that with local control only and 520 kV setting, the Monroe con- troller would have reset withoutthe remote signal. Table 7-4 wate | Se ow With Msc> 92 267 524.1 524.5 11,986 withmsce |46| 197 537.0 | 5316 | 12,149 a. ChiefJoseph—-Monroe 500-kV line outage. b. ChiefJoseph—Monroe outage with EchoLake MSC inserted. c. ChiefJoseph—Monroe outage with Monroe MSC also inserted. The fourth row of Table 7-4 shows the result of the Monroe MSC switching. The Puget Sound area load is restored to within 0.5% of the predisturbance value. This indicates that voltages are mostly returned to predisturbance values, and that there would be very little tap changing at bulk power delivery LTC transformers and distribution voltage regulators. The fast switching prevents voltage decay by tap clanging or thermostatic control ofloads. The centralized control improves the effectiveness ofthe References 179 MSCs. Allowing voltage decay and energizing MSCs at a lower voltage reduces thereactive poweroutput ofall shunt capacitorbanks. Forthecon- dition studied with the centralized MSC control, the Maple Valley SVC does not appear necessary. References 1.

IEEECommitteeReport, VoltageStabilityofPowerSystems:Concepts,Analyti- calTools, andIndustry Experience, IEEE publication 90TH0358-2-PWR, 1990. 2. BonnevillePowerAdministration, PugetSoundAreaElectricReliabilityPlan— FinalEnvironmental ImpactStatement, DOE/EIS - 0160,April 1992. 3. Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electrical Transmission and Distribution Reference Book, EastPittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 1964. 4. C. W. Taylor, “Concepts ofUndervoltage Load Shedding for Voltage Stability,” IEEETransactions onPowerDelivery, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 480-488,April 1992. 5. B. L, Silversteinand D. M. Porter,“ContingencyRankingforBulk System Reli- ability Criteria,” JEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 956- 964,August 1992. 6. S. Koishikawa, S. Ohsaka,M. Suzuki,T.Michigami,andM.Akimoto,“Adaptive Control ofReactive Power SupplyEnhancingVoltage Stability of aBulk Power Transmission System and a New Scheme of Monitor on Voltage Security,” CIGRE,paper38/39-01, 1990. 7. B.C.FurumasuandR.M. Hasibar, “Design andInstallation of500-kVBack-to- BackShuntCapacitor Banks,”IEEETransactionsonPowerDelivery,Vol. 7,No. 2, pp. 539-545,April 1992. _ Voltage Stabilapiety wi.th HVDC Li. nks Progress is trouble. Charles Kettering, former chiefengineer atGeneral Motors High voltage direct current (HVDC) links are used for extremely long distance transmission and for asynchronous interconnections. An HVDC link can be either a back-to-back rectifier/inverter link or can include long distance de transmission. Multi-terminal HVDC links are feasible. Figure 8-1 shows suspended HVDC valves for a +500-kV converter. Figure 8-2 shows an ac harmonic filter. The technology has matured to the point that HVDC terminals can be connected at voltage-weak points in power systems. By voltage-weak, we mean that switching load or shunt reactive compensation causes a large voltage change. This is due to a high impedance source system, or due to heavy ac power transfers.

HVDC links may present unfavorable “load” characteristics to the power system. The dec “load” in question is usually the reactive power con- sumption of an HVDC inverter station providing power to a generation- short load area. An HVDC converter (rectifier or inverter) consumes reactive powerequal to 50-60% ofthede power. Theunfavorable loadchar- acteristics are due to the HVDC control methods used, and to the shunt capacitor compensation used to supply reactive power for the converters. For technical and economic reasons, the problems are most pronounced with long-distance transmission. (Also, back-to-back links are usually far removed from major load centers.) For bulk power system voltage stability, inverters associated with long-distance dc transmission present the most difficulty. AC transmission may parallel the dc transmission. Figure 8-3 shows, schematically, the 182 Chapter 8, Voltage Stability with HVDC Links OP eek a Sa ¢ * a Ey q yes 5 a ps Wwe PeGfi? ae 9 oa Faapmn > ae 3 > —~ f bi ad 7 *. Tay ae Z 24 Sy , Fig. 8-1. 500-kV HVDC converter valves. BonnevillePowerAdministration. => | = as a 4 Be de ; a! 4 : Ese bis. P = = Re yee / ee ee ee Se ee Sigs a rw a ae Oe a Fe je Fig. 8-2. HVDC acfilters. BonnevillePowerAdministration. | i 8.1 Basic Equations forHVDC 183 Smoothing Smoothing reactor reactor aN DC iine, pole 1 NaN vy YY, 7] 1 TF 3 s og a I H| g 8 Ls E4 5B a © DC line, pole 2 AC Filters AC Filters T T Fig. 8-3. Simplified schematic of conventional two-terminal, twelve-pulse, bipolar, long distance HVDC transmission system. There maybe parallel ac transmission. basic two-terminal, twelve-pulse, bipolar system. The ac filters are capaci- tive at fundamental frequency. HVDC-related voltage control (voltage stability and fundamental frequency temporary overvoltages) maybe studied usinga transient stabil- ity program. In some cases an electromagnetic transients program or ana- log simulator should be used.

The effects occur in a fraction ofa second or at most a few seconds following a disturbance. Transient stability (includ- ing transient damping) are often interrelated with voltage stability. Wewill seethat voltage instability caused bythe HVDC characteristics are similarin several ways tootherforms ofvoltage instability. 8.1 Basic Equations for HVDC A detailed development of HVDC characteristics is outside our scope. Rather, we will provide the equations and concepts necessary for under- standing ofbasic HVDC operation. Some familiarity with converter theory and HVDC transmission is assumed. We limit ourdiscussion to two termi- 184 Chapter8, Voltage Stability with HVDC Links nal, long distance lines. For further background, we recommend references 1-5. Because the HVDC controls are fast compared to power system funda- mental frequency dynamics, quasi-dynamic analysis can often beemployed considering only the HVDC link algebraic equations. The equations are for the six-pulse, three phase, full wave bridge circuit which is the building block for systems such as shown on Figure 8-3. Figure 8-4 shows the equiv- alent circuit fordevelopment oftheequations . + Ly=© 1 5 ai Fig. 8-4. Equivalent circuit for three-phase bridge converter with large de-sideinductor(current source orcurrent “stiff” converter). Numbers indi- cate valve firing sequence. We first list the equations (slightly simplified) and then describe their meaning. EquationsforHVDC links: Vor 342 ee Vagi = 1-357 Viqj, 1.35 = (8.1) = L:B5TV Var 3X, = Vaor008@,-R13, R, = zt (8.2) Vai = Vaoi 008 %-Rela = Var- Rita (8.3) 8.1 Basic Equations forHVDC 185 Jy = VaR,o.rta0V8aoit087 (8.4) +R, -Rg I, = em cos @ = at ner (8.5) Py, = Vala = Vala tTRy, Pa = Vala (8.6) cos9,2 ye = ETO cow, et (8.7) dor dor cope ye. = o+on+ = cosy, 52; 4 (8.8) doi doi Qar = Pa tang, Qg, = Py; tang, (8.9) Ideal no-loadaverage dc voltage, Equation 8.1.

The equation provides the de voltage for a three-phase bridge rectifier orinverter based on the ac side line-to-line voltage, V,,, and the converter transformer turns ratio T. (The maximum instantaneous voltage is 2V,. and the minimum instan- taneous voltage is QV,cos 30°. The average de voltage is obtained by integration over a 60° interval.) Converter transformer under-load tap changing is quite important for HVDC links, and typical time delays are relatively short— typically5-15 seconds. The acside voltageiscalledthecommutatingvoltage andisusuallythe converter terminal ac bus voltage. This is because harmonic filters are applied at the converter ac bus to achieve a nearly pure fundamental frequency voltage waveform. On-load dc voltages, Equations 8.2, 8.3, and 8.4. These equations provide the converter terminal average voltages as affected by firing angle control and by direct current. The ideal no-load voltage is reduced by firing angle, a, control. The inverter equation is written in terms of extinction angle, y, where a+y+u = 180°. A particular valve (thyristor group) has positive bias for 180° during which time the valve thyristors are gated or turned on. The firing (delay) angle is measured from the instant ofpositive bias. The extinction angle is measured backward in time from the 180° instant. The angular measure of time for transfer (commutation) is the overlap angle, u. The overlap angle is fifteen to twenty degrees atfullload. Rectifier firing angle is typically fifteen degrees and inverter extinction angle is typically eighteen degrees. Since commutation must be complete by the 180° instant, the extinction angle is also termed the commutating 186 Chapter8, Voltage Stabilitywith HVDC Links Ca e& ee “ a u Y o° 180° Fig. 8-5. Angle relationships for rectifier conditions. At 0°, phase a becomes positive relative to phase c and commutation from valve5 to valve 1 starts at the firing angle a.

The angular measure ofcommutation time is u, dur- ing which both valves are conducting. At 180° phase a becomes negative relative tophase c.Also shown isthe lagging powerfactor angle, ¢,between phasea voltage andthe fundamental component ofphasea current. margin angle. Figure 8-5 shows the angle relationships for rectifier condi- tions (small a, large y). Because ofinductance in the source circuit, commutation cannot occur instantaneously. The nonzero commutation time reduces the de voltage by the product of“commutating resistance,” R,, and direct current. The com- mutating resistance isa fictitious resistance that does not consume power. Itis proportional tothe leakage reactance ofthe converter transformer, X,. The direct current, J,, is constant during steady operation because ofthe large de smoothingreactors used; the converters are current sources. The right-hand-side term ofEquation 8.3 reflects the IR drop ofthe de transmission line. Equations 8.2 and 8.3 can be solved to obtain Equation 8.4. The negative resistance characteristic for inverters is significant and destabilizing. Relationship between firing and extinction angles, Equation 8.5. The equation is from converter theory and involves integration over the commutation time [1, page 83]. The factor 2R, results because the circuit 8.2 HVDC Operation 187 involves the commutating reactances of two phases (on Figure 8-2, the circuit fortransfer from valve 1 tovalve 3 involves the reactancesofphases aand b). Equation 8.5 is important for inverter control. We normally want to control extinction angle, gamma. To avoid “commutation failures,” gamma must be greater or equal to a minimum value, Yin * We cannot, however, control gamma directly. Only the firing angle can be controlled. Explicitly orimplicitly, thefiring angle is determined from the equation. DCpower, Equation 8.6. Power is simply the product ofde voltage and direct current.

For long distance transmission, voltage is held at the maxi- mum value and the current is varied for different power schedules. This minimizes losses. Converterpower factor, converter reactive consumption, Equations 8.7, 8.8, and 8.9. Finally we have equations directly relating to voltage stability. Wewill be examiningthese equations in detail. 8.2 HVDC Operation Closed-loop controls regulate rectifier and inverter firing angles to indi- rectly control variables such as direct current, extinction angle, dc voltage, and de power. Converter transformer tap changing operates in a slower timeframe tooptimize operation. Followingdisturbances, fast intervention by emergency controls may improve power system performance. Normal operation. For normal operation oflong distance, two-terminal HVDC links, the following strategies prevail: ¢ The rectifier controls de current through firing angle control. ¢ The inverter sets the de voltage through constant (minimum) extinction angle control and ultimately through firing angle con- trol. ¢ The rectifier tap changer operates to allow desired rectifier firing angle. ¢ The inverter tap changeroperates to control rectifier (sending end) voltage tomaximum. ¢ DC power is controlled at the rectifier as a current regulator outer loop. The ordered current is the scheduled power divided by the de voltage. The power control may be slow compared to the basic currentcontrol. Disturbance conditions. During emergencies such as ac system faults and severe generator rotor angle swings (which cause voltage swings atthe commutating buses), several backup controls areimportant. os 188 Chapter 8,Voltage Stability withHVDC Links Inverters also have current controllers thatoperate duringlowrectifier voltage or high inverter voltage. The inverter current control intervenes after current has dropped about 0.1 perunit and prevents current collapse. The amount the current order is reduced at the inverter is termed current margin.

More important for voltage stability are controls which reduce the direct current during low voltage. An example is a “voltage dependent cur- rent order limiter” (VDCOL). By reducing current, voltages are supported as can be seen from the powerfactorequations. Since de power is the prod- uct of voltage and current, attempting to maintain or increase current during low voltage, is not productive. In extreme situations, the settings and dynamics of the VDCOL can be critical for voltage stability. A good example is the Itaipu HVDC link in Brazil where the inverter station is near the Sad Paulo load area. Reference 4 describes experience. For the Itaipu link current reduction begins at 0.93 per unit inverter voltage . Voltage stability is a major concern at the Itaipu project. The VDCOL will help voltage (and power) recovery following faults. In thecontextofvoltage stability following clearingofshortcircuits, fastvolt- age recovery helps reacceleration ofnearby induction motors. Several other methods may beused forcurrent orpowerreductiondur- ing low voltage. Detection of low voltage may cause a. switchover from power to current control, or a freezing ofthe voltage measurement usedfor power control. For the Nelson River HVDC system in Canada, detection of low voltage at the inverter 230-kV ac bus (below 0.95 per unit for 250 ms) results in an HVDC power reduction; this avoids need for additional reac- tive power support and helps the Winnipeg area voltage stability . The Nelson River power controllers also have a dc voltage hold for ac voltage dips. This puts the system inquasi constant current control whileretaining power modulation functions [6,7]. Voltage instability is an important con- cern at Nelson River, and the de voltage hold occurs for very small ac volt- age dips atthe inverters. A wide variety of special controls are employed to improve power system dynamic performance . These controls can compensate for the unfavorable characteristics of basic de links.

Unlike ac transmission, de links do not inherently provide synchronizing power in response toa dis- turbance. As a frequency insensitive load, dc links produce negative damp- ing torques at generators. As we will discuss, de links with typical controls may contribute to voltage collapse. The special controls include fast power changes, and modulation of power, current, voltage, or extinction angle. Sometimes there is a conflict between improving synchronous stability and voltage stability. 8.2 HVDC Operation 189 Var Rectifier, a = a, Vq = 135TV,,cos a,,,-Rola Rectifier in \ current control Inverter in current control ———_J Normal Inverter operating VDCOL —> point Rectifier ——> VDCOL Inverter in y,,,, control V4; = 1.357V,, 008 ¥,,,- (Re Ry)La Ty Fig. 8-6. HVDC link steady state characteristic. Steady-state operating characteristics diagram. We can visualize HVDC operation by static de voltage—direct current diagrams. Figure 8-6 shows such a diagram, including VDCOL. The voltage is referred to a common point, the rectifier. R,; is usually greater than R_, resulting in a negative resistancecharacteristic fortheinverter. Currentcontrol is shown as avertical line representing ahigh gain control system. In firing angle or extinction angle control (shown as a,,, and y,,, control), the slope reflects the commutating resistance and the ac voltage sag as direct current is increased. Inverter control. The basic inverter control is constant extinction or commutating margin angle control at a minimum value, y,,,,,. The extinc- tion angle is selected to insure sufficient time forcommutation during most conditions. Equation 8.8 shows that increasing the extinction angle will decrease power factor. The higher reactive current increases equipment cost and equipment losses. Additional reactive power supply equipment is required. Minimum extinction angle design and operation results in poor perfor- mance, however, especially for weak systems.

The inverter characteristics usually modified to improve performance. Figure 8-7a shows the feature 190 Chapter8, Voltage Stabilitywith HVDC Links which is termed “current error control,” “current compounding,” or “beta control” (8 = 180°- a). This method helps control system stability since theintersection oftherectifier andinvertercharacteristics isbetter defined during disturbance conditions. The positive resistance characteristic also improves power system dynamic performance. Normal operation is still at minimum gamma. Further improvement requires operation several degrees above the minimum commutating margin angle as shown on Figure 8-7b and 8-7c. The several degrees allows regulating margin. With the inverter in con- stant de voltage control, constant power results with the rectifier in constant current control. Complicated multiterminal systems such as the Quebec-New Englandlinkuse de voltage control. Va Va Va Yin CONtrol Yerin COTO! Yin CONtTO! Bcontrol Bcontrol V,control, y> Ynin Ta Ta Ty (a) Current error. (b) V4 control. (c) Betacontrol. Fig. 8-7. Inverter control methods. Method (a)is commonly used. Finally, ac voltage can be regulated bygamma modulation. This canbe visualized as shiftingthe inverter staticcharacteristic up and down.If nor- mal operation is at minimum extinction angle, the modulation is one-sided and response is limited toovervoltages excursions. Several back-to-back links employ ac voltage regulation by gamma controland switchingofcapacitors, filters, andreactors. The Gezhouba toShanghai long distancelink inChina alsohas this capability . Thede convertervalves, valvecoolingsystems, acfilters, andconvertertransform- ers are designed to operate at relatively high firing and extinction angles on a continuous basis. Example 8-1. For dc voltage control, calculate the de voltage boost avail- able by operating at an extinction angle of 22°. The minimum extinction angle is 17°.

Solution: Equations 8.1 and 8.3 can be combined togive: | 8.3 Voltage Collapse 191 Va = 135TV,,cos y-RyIy- We are concerned with dips in ac voltage. Since cos 17° = 0.956 and cos 22° = 0.927, a dip of2.9%can be compensated. There is much more capabil- itytocompensate forovervoltages by increasing theextinction angle. Example8-2. An HVDC link is rated and operated at 1000 MW. The over- lap angle at full load is 20°. Calculate the reactive power consumption for operationat a minimum extinction angleof17° and foroperation at 22°. Solution: Equations 8.8 and8.9 apply. For y= 17°, cos ¢ = 0.8775 giving a reactive consumption of 547 MVAr. For y = 22°, cos = 0.8352 and the reactive consumption is659MVAr. Operation at22° with acvoltage control (gamma modulation) is equivalent to a static var compensator with 112 MVarcapacitive range and with a large inductive range. For large voltage dips, the gamma modulation could be combined with mechanically switched capacitors. 8.3 VoltageCollapse We now develop a scenario for voltage collapse involving an inverter in constantextinction angle control. 1. Alarge disturbance occurs nearthe inverterduringheavy load. AC interconnections may be heavily loaded. The power system is highly stressed. 2. The disturbance causes voltage sag, and voltage recovery may be slow. Subsequent voltage swings result from electromechanical oscillation between generators. 3. Reactive power output of capacitor banks and filters are reduced during lowvoltage. 4. In some cases, there are controls that increase extinction angle for acvoltage drop. This istomaintain constant volt-second commutating mar- gin. 5. The inverter power factor will be worse because ofthe low ac volt- age drop and the possiblegamma increase. Thisis apparent from Equation 8.8 whichwe rewrite: cos Rala ¢ = cos¥~ T35TV,.” 6. This results in higherreactive current demand.

Ifpowercontrol is fast compared to the voltage swing or attempted voltage recovery, direct current will be increased—making the power factor still lower. The reac- tive power consumption will increase according to Q = Ptang (Equation o—o 192 Chapter 8, Voltage Stability with HVDC Links 8.9). Attempting a fast de power increase to improve transient rotor angle stability will further increase reactive powerdemand and may be counter- productive. 7. The combined effect of the reduced capacitor bank and filter out- puts and the increased inverter reactive current demand will cause the ac voltage to drop more, possiblyleading tocollapse. 8. Converter transformer tap changing may occur within ten seconds. This may put moreburden onthe acsystem. 9. Reduction in de current and power by VDCOL or other controls may stabilize the system voltage. Reduction in de power, however, may aggravate transient rotor angle stability, leading to more severe voltage swings. Note that even ifthe inverter was initially in constant de voltage con- trol, the minimum extinction angle mode would result because ofdeclining ac voltage and increasing direct current. 8.4 Voltage Stability Concepts Based on Short Circuit Ratio Although we havejustpresented the scenario forvoltage collapse involving HVDC links, additional insight on voltage stability can be gained by exploring concepts having parallels in purely ac systems. Short Circuit Ratio (SCR) and Effective Short Circuit Ratio (ESCR). We defined these terms in Chapter 1, Section 5. For the applica- tion ofHVDC links, they arecommonly used assimplemethodstorelatede powertransfertothe strengthofthe source ac system. Recall thattheshort circuit ratio is the system short circuit capacity divided by the de power.A low short circuit ratio requires special techniques to achieve satisfactory system dynamic performance. Most ofthe reactive power required by a converter is supplied at the terminal.

Effective short circuit ratio (ESCR) includes the effect ofHVDC terminal reactive power equipment on short circuit capacity. The equip- ment may include synchronous condensers, shunt capacitor banks, and harmonic filters (which are capacitive at fundamental frequency). Compared to the basic short circuit ratio from the network, the effective short circuit ratio is increased by synchronous condensers, and reduced by capacitor banks and filters. Synchronous condensers, although used infre- quently, obviously strengthen the network. Capacitors are voltage destabilizing. These facts are reflectedin the ESCR. Example 8-3. An inverter supplying one per unit power to a load area consumes 0.56 per unit reactive power. The system shortcircuit capacity is | 8.4 Voltage Stability Concepts Based on Short Circuit Ratio 193 Network Vice = 1 pu xX, = 0.33 pu = = S = 1-j0.56 pu P=1pu From de mene / Tk = 0.56 pu Converter = commutating (a) orac bus Network Voc = 1 PU x = 0.33 pu S = 1-j0.56 pu P=1pu From de xX, inverter a Paes @ = 0.36 pu Synchronous condenser T Q = 0.2 pu (b) Fig. 8-8. Circuits forexample 8-3. three per unit; therefore the basic short circuit ratio is 3.0. Figure 8-8 shows two methods to provide the required reactive power. For the syn- chronouscondensercase, the condenser and stepup transformer impedance totals 0.4 perunit onthe condenser base(condenserbase is 0.36 perunitof the de base power). Calculate the effective short circuit ratio for each method. Solution for case a (shunt capacitor banks): The capacitive reactance is 1/0.56 or 1.786. The thévenin impedance is: Xen j0.33 (—j1.786) . th =~ 5(1a.78s6-0r.3a3r) = 750.4048. The corresponding short circuit power is V?/Xiy, = 1/0.4048 = 2.47. The ESCR ratio is thus 2.47 compared to the basic short circuit ratioof3. ! 194 Chapter 8,Voltage Stability with HVDC Links Solution for case b (synchronous condenser): The condenser reactance on the system (de power) base is 0.4/0.36 = 1.111.

The parallel combination of the condenser and the source reactance is 0.2544. The shunt capacitor reactance is 1/0.2 = 5. Thethévenin reactance is 0.2681 andthe ESCRratio is3.73. Asimpler methodofcalculating ESCR is: ESCR = system sc power +condenser sc power —capacitor MVAr dc power Shortcircuit ratios can beclassified as follows: High SCR>5 Moderate SCR = 3-5 Low SCR = 2-3 Very Low SCR<2 In recent years, HVDC links have been installed with short circuit ratios as low as 1.6. The McNeill back-to-back station in Alberta, Canada hasaminimum ESCRofless than 1.0 . Special techniques are required to achieve satisfactory performance. An IEEE Committee report describes fiveinstallations all ofwhich areback-to-back links. Special tech- niques are easier toapply on the simpler back-to-back links. In some cases, we are interested in power system disturbances affect- ing several HVDC links in close proximity to each other. For example, two high capacity long-distance links terminate in the Los Angeles load area (Pacific HVDC Intertie and Intermountain Power Project). In this case, we can consider a “combined SCR” where the power system has to support the unfavorable load characteristics ofseveral links. Example 8-4. For voltage stability in the LosAngeles load area, calculate the combined SCR iftheminimum short circuitcapacity is 14,000 MVA. Solution: The rating ofthe Pacific HVDC Intertie (Celilo to Sylmar) is 3100 MW and the rating ofthe Intermountain Power Project (Intermoun- tain toAdelanto) is 1920 MW. Since the LosAngeles terminals (Sylmar and Adelanto) are normally inverters, the received power is less than the rat- ings because of dc transmission line losses—this effect will be neglected. Thecombined SCRis then 14,000/(3100 + 1920)or2.8. Sinceonly capacitor banks and filters are used for reactive supply, the effective short circuit ratio is lower.

This measure is highly approximate and depends, among other factors, on how closely the two links are coupled for a particular dis- turbance. Several years ago, a third dc link into the Los Angeles load area was considered (Phoenix to Mead toAdelanto 2000 MW link). This would have reduced thecombinedshort circuit ratioto about 2.0. 8.4 Voltage StabilityConcepts Based on ShortCircuit Ratio 195 Maximum power andpower instability. In Chapter 2, for ac systems, we discussed the idea of maximum power. For a basic system, power is maximum when the magnitude ofload impedance equals the magnitude of sourceimpedance. Adding more load results inless power. HVDC links have analogous characteristics. As direct current is increased, de power will increase. At some point, however, further increase in direct current will cause lower dc power. The reason is simply that the increased reactive power consumption sags ac voltage, and thereby dc volt- age, so that the dc voltage is falling more than the direct current increase. We could show this on a P,—V,, nose curve and on a P, versus I, curve. Compared to P-V curves for a simple ac system, curves for an inverter in constant extinction angle control feeding a source system will cut across the constant power factor lines of Figure 2-8; the power factor becomes more lagging as dc power is increased [13,14]. On the unstable side, continued current increase by power control would cause voltage collapse. Usually, however, other controls would act to limit orreduce current. Figure 8-9 shows the sensitivity of de power to changes in direct cur- rentas afunction ofinverter terminal short circuit ratio . The thévenin 1 0.5 a 3 0 wp 0.5 S a < “1.5 2 1 2 4 6 8 10 Inverter SCR Fig. 8-9. Sensitivity of de power to changes in direct current. Inverter in constant extinction angle control at y=18°.

Commutation reactance is 138% and source impedance angle is 90° . © 1986 IEEE. = 196 Chapter8, Voltage Stability with HVDC Links source voltage is one per unit and one per unit voltage is obtained at the inverter terminal by application ofshunt capacitor banks. The inverter is in constant extinction angle control. For a high short circuit ratio, the per unit power increase is nearly equal to the per unit current increase. Fora short circuit ratio less than about 2.2, an increase in direct current results in lower de power. DC power control at low short circuit ratios results in power instability. Tap changer instability. In conjunction with Figure 2-14, we discussed tap changer instability. At the nose ofaP-Vcurve, tap changing to reflect additional load conductance to the primary system results in reduced power, meaning the load-side voltage has decreased. Similar phenomena exists with HVDC links supported by weak ac systems. For the same conditions as for Figure 8-9, Figure 8-10 shows sensitivity ofde voltage to a 1% change in converter transformer tap ratio for varying short circuit ratios . For high short circuit ratios, nearly a 1% change in voltage is obtained. For short circuit ratios less than about 1.9, the voltage change is negative. 0.015 S 0.01 | 0.0054 a w ie} <i SS > -0.005 < | -0.01— -0.015 1 2 4 6 8 10 Inverter shortcircuit ratio Fig. 8-10. Sensitivity ofde voltage to a 1% change in converter transformer tap ratio. Inverter in constant extinction angle control at y=18° and recti- fierisin current control. Commutation reactance is 13% and source imped- ance angle is 90° . © 1986 IEEE. 8.4 Voltage Stability Concepts Based on Short Circuit Ratio 197 Voltage StabilityFactor (VSF). Short circuit ratio measures can also be defined with regard to reactive power consumed by an HVDC converter. This is appealing since it is the variation ofreactive power that causes the major change in system voltage.

This is captured in a less simplistic mannerby“voltage stability factor.” Short circuit capacity related measures are simple. For some purposes they are useful—for other purposes they are simplistic. They do not accountforthefast-acting controls ofHVDC links and static varcompensa- tors. Short circuit ratios also do not clearly indicate problems with voltage control during high ac system power transfers. We can see this effect on P-Vor Q-Vcurves—as we get closer to the nose ofthe curve, the voltage change fora power increment increases. Although dynamic study is normally used for detailed analysis, Ham- mad and Kiihn developed a power flow program based “Voltage Stability Factor” (VSF) measure ofAC/DC voltage control and stability . The Voltage StabilityFactor is defined as: vsF = V=ic |. _ 88, 80, 180.30, (8.10) AV,, AVae AVae AVac P, where Aq = AQ, +AQ, —-AQ, —AQ, and AV,, is a variation ofvoltage at the converter commutating bus (converter ac bus). AQ, is the incremental reactive power from the ac network, AQ, is the incremental converter reactive consumption, AQ, is the incremental reactive power from capaci- tor banks and filters, and AQ, is the incremental reactive power from an optional static varcompensator orsynchronous condenser. See Figure 8-11. Following every power flow solution, the VSF can be computed using sensitivity computation with the linearized system. The equations are modified using appropriate models such as voltage dependent load models andvoltage behindtransient reactance generatormodels. Thedenominator terms ofthe right-hand-side term ofEquation 8-10 are linearized represen- tation ofthe controlled equipment; for example, the AQ,/A V,, term for a static var compensator is the inverse of the slope characteristic. The methodofinverter control has a major effect onthe VSF. Figure 8-12 showsVSFresults foraninverterwithshort circuit ratio of 1.8.

Three inverter control modes are shown: constant extinction angle, constant beta (firing angle) control, and ac voltage control with switched shunt capacitor banks. The small-disturbance voltage stability is greatly improved by the latter method. Large disturbance performance for low 198 Chapter 8, Voltage Stability with HVDC Links Vac P, Pa AC system Q, k DC system Q. |= —j % svc] @ Aq or = synch. cond. T Fig. 8-11. System components to determine Voltage Stability Factor . © 1986 IEEE. 250 ° Constant ycontrol > 200 8 S u 150 2 Constant Bcontrol we} © @ 100 | © = s 50 AC voltage control w/capacitor switching ——— oo _ oJ_—_ 1a oot 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 DC power - pu Fig. 8-12. Voltage Stability Factor for three types of inverter control . SCR = 1.8. © 1986 IEEE. voltage would depend on the available mechanically switched capacitor banks. 8.5 Power System Dynamic Performance 199 8.5 PowerSystem Dynamic Performance Analysis ofrealistic systems usually involves simulation using a transient stability program. Detailed models for the HVDC link and for motor loads are required. Often both synchronous and voltage stability must be consid- ered, and appropriate trade-offs made between the two types of stability. The interaction between synchronous stability (transient stability includ- ingtransient damping) and voltage stability maybe very complex. Comparison between AC and DC Transmission. In planning a new long distance interconnection, we have to choose between HVDC and ac transmission. Dynamic performance (synchronous and voltage stability) should be one of the considerations in the decision. The ability to apply fast-acting stability enhancingcontrols toHVDC links is often stated as an important advantage of HVDC. We must examine this “common wisdom” carefully. With ac transmission, large networks operate in synchronism. Follow- ing disturbances, the inherent properties of ac transmission support the stability ofinterconnected synchronousgenerators.

Forexample,foroutage ofa line, parallel lines will virtually instantaneously pick up much ofthe power thatwas carried onthe lost line. Inertial power swings will followto provide additional synchronizing and damping torques to generators. Although reactive power losses will increase, and line charging power will decrease, the effects are relatively minor in the transient stability time frame, particularly ifload characteristics are notespecially onerous. DC transmission in the usual constant power control mode does not provide additional power without special controls. Robust closed-loop spe- cial controls may be difficult to design [17-19]. For disturbances and low voltages, power control increases direct current—significantly increasing the reactive demand ofconverters. We have learned that the combination ofpower control, constant extinction angle control at inverters, and shunt capacitors may threaten voltage stability. Switching from power control to current control will help voltage stability at the expense of synchronous stability. Power modulation for synchronizing or damping support will be lost in current control. For the western North American interconnection, we compared ac and de transmission . The transient stability simulation comparison involved replacing the 787 km Intermountain Power Project HVDC link with a hypothetical ac link. For the two disturbances studied, system dynamic performance with the ac link dynamic performance was remark- ably superior. For the cases with the dc link, the effect of switching from power control to current control during low voltage was investigated—for one disturbance itwasbeneficial, forthe other it was detrimental. = 200 Chapter 8, Voltage Stability with HVDC Links Simulation study with voltage collapse. In Example 8-4, we mentioned that a third HVDC link into the Los Angeles area was considered several years ago.

The 2000 MW link was three-terminal—from the Phoenix, Arizona area to the Mead Substation near Las Vegas, Nevada to the Adelanto Substation eastofLosAngeles. The Intermountain PowerProject inverteris alsoatAdelanto. Simulation studies are reported in reference 20. The disturbance stud- ied was a three-phase fault near the Palo Verde Nuclear Plant west of Phoenix. The fault was on a 500-kV ac line from Palo Verde to the Devers Substation east of Los Angeles near Palm Springs (permanent outage of the line). This line is in parallel with the proposed three-terminal HVDC link. The Intermountain Power Project was modeled as operated: rectifier in powercontrol and inverter in constant extinction angle control. Simulation results showed system dynamic performance benefited more from reduction ofconverter reactive power demand than from fast de power restoration and synchronizingsupport. Forthe PaloVerde fault and line outage, system stability was marginal prior to adding the additional de link. Adding the new dc link causeda fast voltagecollapse (before significant rotor angle swings). With high level modulation ofde power based on Adelanto ac voltage, transient instability and voltage collapse occurred on the first swing. The power modulation reduced de power in phase with, and in propor- tion to, the ac voltage drop at the Adelanto inverter. Telemetry was required to the main rectifier atPhoenix. The effect was to release reactive power at both the Phoenix area rectifier and the Adelanto inverter. The power modulation, while preventing fast voltage collapse, had a de-syn- chronizing effect. A stable case required, in addition to the power modulation, a 400 MvVAr static var compensator and gamma modulation at the Adelanto inverter. Figure 8-13 shows ac voltage at Adelanto for three cases: pre-de link, power modulation alone, and power modulation plus SVC andgamma mod- ulation.

For the first swing of the stable case, the power modulation reduced the Adelanto power and current by about 70%. This reduced the Adelanto inverter reactive powerdemand by about 800 MVAr. References 1. E. W. Kimbark,DirectCurrent Transmission, Wiley-Interscience, 1971. 2. Ebasco Services Incorporated, Methodology for Integration ofHVDC Links in LargeACSystems—Phase 1: Reference Manual, EPRI Final Report EL-3004, References 201 1.2 = ax ae ‘> ‘> <1 N Vax y \ \ 52 IX \ \ \ / 708 \/ \ 7 \ | 7 Na / Nu 2 Without Phoenix-Mead—Adelanto gs 06 HVDC link s* With Phoenix-Mead-Adelanto, 8 400 MVAr SVC, power and 204 gamma modulation © 8 3 — With Phoenix-Mead—Adelanto, =<0”2 large power modulation only 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Time - seconds Fig. 8-13. Adelanto ac voltage for outage three-phase fault at Palo Verde and outage ofthe Palo Verde—Devers 500-kV line. 1992 light load summer conditions . © 1988 IEEE. 3. Institut de Recherche d’Hydro-Québec, Methodology for the Integration of HVDC Links in LargeAC Systems—Phase 2:Advanced Concepts, EPRI Final ReportEL-4365,April 1987. 4. P. Kundur,PowerSystem StabilityandControl, McGraw-Hill, 1993. 5. CIGRE Working Group14-07 and IEEE Working Group15.05.05, Guide for Planning DCLinks Terminating atACSystems Locations Having Low Short-- Circuit Capacities, Part I:AC/DCInteraction Phenomena, CIGRE,June 1992. 6. IEEE Committee Report, “HVDC Controls for System Dynamic Performance,” IEEETransactionsonPowerSystems,Vol. 6,No. 2, pp. 743-752, May 1991. 7. R. W. Haywood andJ. Chand, “ResponsesoftheNelson RiverHVDC System to Disturbances on the Receiving EndAC Network,” CIGRE, Proceedings of31st Session, Vol. I, paper 14-04, 1984. 8. M. M. Rashwan, G. B. Mazur, M.A. Weekes, and D. P. Brandt, “AC/DC System Power/Voltage StabilityEnhancement UsingModified PowerControl,”Proceed- ingsofSecondHVDCSystem Operating Conference, pp. 35-39,Winnipeg, Can- ada, 18-21 September 1989. 9.

J.Chand andD.Tang, “Operational ExperienceoftheNelsonRiverHVDCSys- tem,” Proceedings ofSecond HVDC System Operating Conference, pp. 21-31, Winnipeg, Canada, 18-21 September 1989. 10. IEEE Committee Report, “DC Transmission Terminating at Low Short Circuit Ratio Locations,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. PWRD-1, No. 3, pp. 308-318, July 1986. = 202 Chapter8, Voltage Stability with HVDC Links 11. A. Hammad, H. Koelsch, and P. Daehler, “Active and Reactive Power Controls for the Gezhouba-Shanghai HVDC Transmission Scheme,”Fifth International ConferenceonACandDCPower Transmission, IEEConference Publication No. 345,pp. 279-284, September 1991. 12. R. P. Burgess, J. D. Ainsworth, H. L. Thanawala, M. Jain, and R. S. Burton, “Voltage/VAr Control at McNeill Back-to-Back HVDC Convertor Station,” CIGRE, Papersof the 1990Session, paper 14-104, 1990. 13. A. Gavrilovic, etal. (CIGRE/IEEE committee paper), “Interaction Between DC and AC Systems,” CIGRE Symposium on AC/DC Transmission Interactions andComparisons, paper200-20, Boston, 28-30 September 1987. 14. LP.hAe.noS.mePinlaotto, M. Szechtman, andA.Hammad, “TransientAC Voltage Related forHVDC Schemes ConnectedtoWeakAC Systems,”IEEETrans- actionsonPowerDelivery, Vol. 7,No. 3, pp. 1396-1404,July 1992. 15. R. J. Piwko, F. Nozari, R. L. Hauth, and C. W. Flairty, “Control Systems for Application in HVDC Terminals at AC System Locations Having Low Short Circuit Capacities,” Proceeding ofIEEE MONTECH'86 Conference on HVDC Power Transmission, Montreal, September 29—October 1, 1986. 16. A. E. Hammad and W. Kiihn, “AComputationAlgorithm forAssessing Voltage Stability at AC/DC Interconnections,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1,pp. 209-216, February 1986. 17. IEEE Committee Report, “AC-DC Economics and Alternatives—1987 Panel Session Report,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 5, No. 4, pp. 1956-1976, October 1990. 18. J. F.

Hauer, discussion of “AC-DC Economics and Alternatives—1987 Panel Session Report,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 5, No. 4, pp. 1956-1976, October 1990. 19. R. L. Cresap, D. N. Scott, W.A.Mittelstadt, andC. W.Taylor, “OperatingExpe- rience with Modulation ofthe Pacific HVDC Intertie,” IEEE Transactions on PowerApparatusandSystems, Vol. PAS-98, pp. 1053-1059,July/August 1978. 20. R. L. Lee, D. Zollman,J. F. Tang, J. C. Hsu,J. R. Hunt, R. S. Burton, andD. E. Fletcher, “EnhancementofAC/DC System PerformancebyModulationofaPro- posed Multiterminal DC system intheSouthwestern U.S.,”IEEETransactions on PowerDelivery, Vol. 3,No. 1, pp. 307-316,January 1988. Power System Planni. ng and Operating Guidelines Noproblem canstand the assault ofsustained thinking. Voltaire Inboth planning and operation, the maingoal in studying voltage stability is to increase power transfer by removing voltage stability limits. If we remove voltage stability as the limit, we work on the new limitation (perhaps transient stability) which may result in voltage stability limits again. Ultimately, thermal limits may be reached. We not only want to analyze voltage stability, we want to solve voltage stability problems. Voltage stability has many facets. There are also many solutions to voltage stability challenges. The solutions involve all types ofequipment— generation, transmission, and distribution. We want to find low cost solu- tions wherever possible; this often means special controls. Solutions also involve power system operating methods. Solutions described in previous chapters will be summarized inthis chapterand some new methods willbe described. Before describing solutions, we will discuss planning and operating criteria. Whatconstitutes acceptable performance? 9.1 Reliability Criteria In designing and operating a power system, criteria should be developed, and agreed to,byinvolved parties. The criteria guides us as towhat perfor- mance is required.

Reliability of 100% is not possible because unusual disturbances sometimes occur.Attempting 100% reliability is not desirable because the cost would be very high. A prudent amount of risk must be taken. 204 Chapter 9, Power System Planning and Operating Guidelines Planning (design) and operating criteria may be either deterministic or value-based (probabilistic). For stability, deterministic criteria are most common. Based on experience and judgement, certain “credible” distur- bances are selected to test stability. Certain performance is then required. Disturbance criteria. For transient rotor angle (synchronous) stability, a typical criterion in developed countries is to remain stable, with some margin, for a three-phase fault ona critical line near a major generating station; the fault is cleared in normal relay and circuit breaker time by openingthe faulted line. The required margin toinstability maybebasedon voltage dip during swings, or based on stability with interties loaded some percentage above the operating limit. Although three-phase faults on EHV lines near generating stations are rare, the three-phase fault “umbrella” ensures stable operation fora variety ofmultiplecontingency disturbances. Value-based criteria, or aspects ofvalue-based criteria, will probably be used in the future to optimize design and operation. This requires consider- ation ofstatistics on frequency offaults, fault type, fault location; frequency ofline and multiple line outages with or without successful reclosing; and frequency of generation outages. Factors such as load levels and relay misoperation probabilities are important. Costs ofinstability must be esti- mated. By using much more information specific to the problem at hand, overdesign may be avoided.” Prudent risk is taken.

In computing the costof instability, attention is focused on backup protection to prevent or mitigate wide-spread blackouts (e.g., automatic load shedding, controlled separa- tions, or plans for fast restoration). Reliability criteria for voltage stability are not as well developed as criteria for rotor angle stability. One concept is to establish voltage stability criteria with similar probabilities as those used for rotor angle stability . Forexample, the three-phase fault criterion described above has low proba- bility. For longer-term voltage stability, short circuits are not important— only the resulting line outage. For similarly severe low probability distur- bances affecting voltage stability, multiple contingencies are required. This could be outage of several lines (especially double-circuit lines), or a line outage with reactive sources or load area generators out-of-service. Other conditions such as load level and generation pattern, and modeling assump- tions could be factored intocriteria. *Quoting fromPereira andBalu :“...thedeterministic criteria maylead touneconomic designs (usually overdesign) as compared with the“true” optimal design, whichtakes intoaccounttheprobability ofeach operating scenario, andtheeconomicconsequencesofunderperformance underthesce- narios.” | 9.1 Reliability Criteria 205 Example 9-1. For voltage stability in the Puget Sound area ofthe Pacific Northwest, the following criteria are being used: For heavy loads (one-in- two years cold weather), stability for a critical double-circuit 500-kV line outage is required. For extra heavy loads (one-in-twenty years very cold weather), stability for a critical single-circuit 500-kV line outage is required. For the two events, thejoint probability ofload level and distur- bance are somewhat similar. Performance criteria and margin to instability. Performance criteria also are needed. Traditionally, post-disturbance voltage magnitudes requirements have been used.

Voltages must notbe belowa specified value such as0.95 perunit. This is notsatisfactory, since reactive power reserves could be very low. The combination of voltage magnitude and reactive power reserves at effective locations provides good planning or operating criteria. A required margin or security measure from an operating point to instability is also used. (Usually, the margin is to the maximum power transfer point rather than the instability point, with the tacit assumption thatoperation athigher loads isunacceptable.) Margin allows forinaccura- cies in simulation, and for differences between actual and simulated oper- ating conditions. Experience, judgement, and sensitivity studies are required inselecting appropriate margin foraparticular powersystem. For economic reasons, excessive margin requirements must be avoided; overly conservative (pessimistic) models must also be avoided . Various candi- date variables for margin requirements are interlinked and relate in some manner to adequate reactive power reserves. Considering P-Vor Q-Vcurves, margin can be quantified in terms of MW (or MVA) or MVaAr distance from the operating point to the critical or maximum power transfer point (Figure 9-1). MW margin can be in terms of a transmission interface or in terms of area load. Usually, area load is assumed to increase with constant power factor. MVAr margin often is computed for a single key bus using the fictitious synchronous condenser method (V-Q rather than Q-Vcurve). For large systems, however, comput- ingreactive power margin by reactive load increases throughout an area is more realistic. MW margin could allow for loads exceeding forecasts. Alternatively, MW margin could relate to forced or prior outages ofgeneration in a load area; this meansthat stability maybemaintained foran additional contin- gency. Ifa500 MW margin is used, stability should be maintained for loss ofgenerators smaller than 500 MW.

MVaAr margins are attractive since voltage and reactive power are closely linked. The MVAr margin could relate to the size ofshunt capacitor = 206 Chapter9, PowerSystem Planning and Operating Guidelines banks or static var compensators in the area. If a 150 MVAr shunt capaci- tor bank is nearby, a margin greater than 150 MVAr ensures that stability is maintained for the additional contingency of loss of nearby reactive power sources. MVAr margin also allows for loads exceeding forecast. Dur- ing heavy loads, each additional megawatt ofload mayrequire twoorthree megavar ofreactive powersupport. As discussed in reference 2, the MW or MVAr margin could relate to a fairly high probability situation such as a load-area generator being off- line. The post-disturbance margin must be satisfied by the system design, or bythe pre-disturbance system operation. The P-V curve slope (AV/AP) or the V-Q curve slope (AV/AQ) at the operating point may be used as an indicator of voltage security. A large change in voltage for a small change in loading means abnormally high stress, with the possibility ofcurrent limitingatsome generators. P-V and V-Q curves providea critical voltage. In order for voltage magnitude monitoring to be meaningful, the critical voltage must be below normal operating voltages. In the past, British Columbia Hydro used per- formance criteria requiring that the critical voltage must be below 0.95 per unit and that the critical voltage must be 5% below the operating voltage [4, page 152]. Assuming traditional constant power load models, these requirements may be very difficult to meet. The criteria can rule out volt- age stability solutions involving shunt capacitor banks or static var com- pensators that improve MWor MVArmargin butraise critical voltage. The amount ofreactive reserves, particularly fast-acting reserves from generators or static compensators, affects voltage stability.

The reactive Vv MWdistanceto Vv MVArdistance to critical point critical point Operating P Operating Q point point Fig. 9-1. MW and MVArdistance tovoltage instability (maximum poweror critical point). 9.1 Reliability Criteria 207 reserves must be at effective locations. If meaningful “voltage control areas” can be defined, adequate reactive reserve must be available in the voltage control area in question. Current limiting at any generator or SVC reduces security. As described in Chapters 6 and Appendix B, sensitivity analysis and steady-state modal analysis provide considerable insight into critical locations for reactive reserves. AppendixB also describes indices for volt- age stability. For any selected criteria, the models and methods of analysis are important. For example, aP-Vcurve maybecomputed foracontingency by starting from a base case, taking the contingency, and then increasing power until the nose is reached; the MW distance to voltage collapse is a measure ofsystem robustness. Alternatively, a new base case with appro- priate generation dispatch could be computed at each power level; contin- gency cases for that power level are then computed. Ifload build-up is the concern, contingency cases may not be required. Guidelines. Reliability criteria forvoltage stability areevolvingand it will be several years before criteria starts to be standardized. The nature of voltage stability problems for different utilities and systems may be such that several approaches will be used. This is true today, as some utilities relymainly onP-Vcurve performance andothersrely mainlyon V-Q curve performance. Modeling approaches also differ. Nevertheless, we will make certain recommendations. The recommen- dations are largely based on voltage stability analysisofprevious chapters. See alsoAppendix C. 1. For large-scale systems, the V-Q curve method applied to a single testbus is unrealistic andshould notbeused fordecision making.

Although widelyused in the past, newcomputer programs facilitate improved analy- sis techniques. 2. Disturbance criteria should consider other factors besides the pri- maryline or generator outage. Prior outage ofreactive sources, generation, or reduced reactive capability ofsome generation may be appropriate. The probability oflosing more than one line should be evaluated, particularly for double-circuit lines or lines terminating at the same substations. Sym- pathetic relaying (relay misoperation on a parallel unfaulted line) has always been a problem. One method to provide for prior outages ofequip- mentis an appropriate MWor MVArmargin tothe maximum power trans- fercapability point. 3. Disturbance and performance criteria severity should account for backup control and protection in service. Backup control may include volt- age control ofshunt capacitors banks normally switched by cverators. Cri- 208 Chapter 9, PowerSystem Planning and Operating Guidelines teria can be relaxed if small amounts of undervoltage load shedding stabilizes the system with acceptable voltages. 4. Modeling of loads and generation should be carefully considered. Constant power modeling ofloads may be too conservative, especially for wintertime situations. Expanded representation oflower-voltage networks is highly desirable, particularly ifthe lower voltage networks include gen- eration . Sensitivity cases help determine appropriate modeling. Time domain (dynamic) simulation is required ifthe loads have fast dynamics. Dynamic simulation may be desired forconfirmation ofsteady-state analy- sis when the load dynamics are slow. 5. Reactive power reserve should be monitored both in analyzing simulation results and in operatinga real system. Generators, synchronous condensers, and static var compensators should not be in a control limit state following relatively high probability contingencies. Example deterministic criteria. The load area is tested during heavy load conditions.

A major reactive power source (generator, SVC, or shunt capacitor bank) is outofservice prior to a large disturbance. For a single outage (first contingency), the system must serve the predisturbance load with no fast-acting reactive power sources at control limits; a specified small amount offast-acting reactive power reserve must remain for control ofnormal load fluctuations. Automatic local or central- ized shunt reactive power compensation switchingis allowed. For credible multiple outages (e.g., outages of double circuit lines or lines with common terminations), undervoltage load shedding is allowed. Other emergency controls such as blocking oftap changers or direct load shedding are allowed. Consumer voltages must be above 90%. No addi- tional powerplants or transmission lines shall be in dangeroftripping. Performance is confirmed by the most realistic simulation methods available. 9.2 Solutions: Generation System Improving voltage stability at the generation system involves planning, control and protection, andoperation and maintenance. Planning. The reliability benefits ofgeneration in load areas should be a factorin generation siting decisions. This requires education ofpolicy mak- ers; remote generation alternatives mean either additional transmission or decreased power system reliability. Gas turbines in load areas should be designed for fast start-up. Gas turbines and other expensive-to-operate generators could be designed to be de-clutchedforoperation as synchronous condensers [6,7]. 9.2 Solutions: Generation System 209 For voltage stability improvement, several utilities are overhauling ratherthan retiringolder synchronous condensers. As discussedin Chapter 5 (Example 5-1), specifyinglower powerfactor generation will increase fast-acting reactive reserves. If generators nor- mally operate near unity power factor, the reduced generator losses will reduce the life-cycle cost increase of the larger, lower power factor machines.

New non-utility generation should be reviewed with regard to voltage stability performance . Load tap changing on generator step-up (GSU) transformers and auxil- iary system transformers have advantages for voltage stability. LTC trans- formers allowthetransmission sidevoltage tobe maintained atthe highest possible value without regard to terminal voltage. For fixed tap transform- ers, voltage stability should be a factor in determining tap settings. Excitation system control andprotection. For transient voltage stabil- ity, modern high initial response and high ceiling excitation systems help induction motors reaccelerate following faults. Excitation controls are discussed in detail in Chapter 5, Section 2. Volt- age stability can be improved by better regulation of the generator high side voltage. This can be by line drop compensation or by an outer control loop. Keeping transmission voltage high minimizes the increase in reactive losses followingadisturbance. Examples in Chapters 6 and7 show the ben- efits. This isone ofthe most cost-effective methods ofimproving voltage sta- bility. Many older generators do not have overexcitation limiters, or do not have adequate overexcitation limiters. Overexcitation limiters thattrip the excitation system to the predisturbance excitation level (typically near unity power factor) can cause disaster. If overexcitation limiters are not used, protection often trips the generator ifthe field current remains above rated current; this can also cause disaster. The excitation system should be modernized to incorporate continuously regulating field current limiters. Active power controls. Fast generation changes can improve voltage stability. In attemptingfast generation changes, we are in a race with load restoration by tap changing and generator current limiting. Figure 5-10 shows the overall concepts; Chapter 5, Section 4 describes details. Protection.

Undesirable operation of“transmission system backup protec- tion” has beena factor in several voltage collapses. This stator-connected protection shouldbe carefully reviewed—see Chapter 5, Section 2. 210 Chapter 9, Power System Planning and Operating Guidelines Maintenance. Generation systems are very complicated. Proper mainte- nance of both main equipment and control and protection is obviously important. Verification and maximization ofreactive power capability is especially important . This includes control settings such as overexcitation limiters, alarm settings, protection, tap changer settings, and limitations imposed by auxiliaries. A testing program at Public Service Company of Colorado resulted in a 50% increase in reactive power capability from their generators. As described in Appendix F, the January 12, 1987 voltage collapse in Western France wasgreatly exasperated bythetripping ofeight thermal plants due to field current protection defects. Operation. To reduce power imports, gas turbines and othergenerators in load areas may have to be run out-of-merit (uneconomically) during high loading periods. For loss ofload-area generation contingencies, spinning reserve should be available in the load area. Generation control (AGC) should rapidlyacti- vate the spinning reserve. In some cases, it may be advantageous to reduce real power loading of generators in load areas to allow higher reactive power loading. Power should be rescheduled overlightly loaded lines (Chapter 5, Section 4). Reactive power output ofgenerators should be closely monitored. The reactive power capability ofgenerators should be known by control center operators. Shunt capacitor banks should be used to maintain fast-acting reactive powerreserves atgenerators. Power plant operators should be trained to allow high reactive power output of generators during infrequent emergency conditions. Automatic controls will reduce reactive power output as time-overload capability is used. Modeling.

Forpower flow programs, PVbuseswith simple Q,,,, and Qrin limits should be avoided. At a minimum, reactive power limits should be a function of active power loading as given by generator capability curves. Advanced programs directly calculate the field and armature currents to enforce limits . Longer-term dynamics programs model excitation limit- ingcontrol and protection.Achallenge is todevelop accurate databases for the improved models—the effort should be made. 9.3 Solutions: Transmission System Chapter3 describesthetransmission system includingreactive power com- pensation. 9.3 Solutions: Transmission System 211 Transmission design. Fornew construction, voltage stability is enhanced by high surge impedance loading values. This is accomplished by bundled conductors and compact line design . The reduced reactance by increas- ingthe number ofsubconductors per phase is equivalent to uniformly dis- tributed series compensation (without subsynchronous resonance or other concerns). New lines are difficult to build because of environmental, visual amenity, orfinancial reasons. Ifwe have the opportunity to build a line, we should consider design for high capacity (high thermal capacity, low loss, and high surge impedance loading). Double circuit EHV lines should be considered. An increase in the number ofsubconductors ofanew high capacity line tends tooptimize loadings ofthe new line andlower capacity parallel lines. Example 9-2. Calculate the inductive reactance, charging power, and surge impedance loading for several 500-kV line designs. Similar to Exam- ple 3-1, the radius and GMR for all conductors are 2.5 and 2 cm, and the spacing between subconductors is46 cm. Frequencyis 60 Hz and operating voltage is 540 kV. Similar to tower types 5L8 and 5L2 from the EPRI Transmission Line Reference Book , the spacing between phases is 9.4 m. Calculate parameters forhorizontal and delta phase configurations, and for2, 3, and 4 subconductors per phase.

Solution: Equations 3.1 through 3.7 are used to develop the following table. Comparing the extreme cases (two subconductors/horizontal and four subconductors/delta), an increase in surge impedance of29% percent is obtained. Using Equation 3.8, this is equivalent to 40% percent uni- formly distributed series compensation. Table for Example 9-2 “Horiz. | Horiz. | Horiz. | Delta | Delta | Delta =0vkm | 0.865 | 0.825 | 0.280 | 0.347 | 0.308 | 0.262 | ag arin [a9 [van [se | va [ae | 1 | Psa [ soir [nw [a [aves [aor [on Additional subconductors may also be considered for reconductoring projects, perhaps for 230-kV lines as well as EHV lines. Utilities may, for example, have older 500-kV lines with conservative tower design and only 212 Chapter 9, Power System Planning and Operating Guidelines two subconductors per phase. Additional subconductors could be added with only minortowerreinforcements. Reactivepowercompensation. As described in Chapter 3, series capaci- tors have advantages over shunt capacitors and shouldbe considered. Long EHV transmission lines usually require shunt reactors. Switch- able shunt reactors can be disconnected during voltage emergencies by operators, orby undervoltage relays. Tripping of230-kV shunt reactors by undervoltage relays is used by Florida Power and Light Company—the controls were implemented after a series ofvoltage collapses in 1982 . As discussed above, shunt capacitor banks can be used to allow genera- tors to operate near unity power factor. This may require transmission system shunt capacitor banks rather than subtransmission and distribu- tion shuntcapacitors. Mechanically switched shunt capacitors and static var compensators improve voltage stability. Application is discussed in Sections 3 and 4 of Chapter 3. Bonneville Power Administration is developing a new low-cost method to improve the effectiveness of large 230-kV and 500-kV shunt capacitor banks .

Duringlow voltage, series groups ofwye-grounded shunt capac- itors banks are temporary shorted to reduce capacitive reactance, and therebyincrease reactive poweroutput. Someofthe temporary(10-30 min- utes) overvoltage capability of capacitors is used. Voltage-controlled medium voltage switches are used to short the series groups. Figure 9-2 shows the concept for a 168 MVAr, 241.5-kV wye-grounded shunt capacitor bank. Figure 9-3 shows the modified capacitor bank characteristic. Short- ing3 of14 series groups increases capacitor reactive power output by 14/11 or 127%. Optimal power flow programs are useful forminimizing reactive power additions—subject to constraints and contingencies. Most programs, however, only satisfy voltage magnitude constraints and do not directly addressvoltage instability/collapse. Optimal power flow is an areaofactive development and improved software can beexpected inthe future. Replace- ment ofPCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) capacitors should be optimized for the current system—with due regard for voltage stability. Controls. Automatic on-load tap changing on large EHV/HV autotrans- formers can improve voltage stability. By regulating the voltage ofthehigh voltage system, shunt capacitoroutput and high voltage system line charg- ing is supported, and reactive losses are minimized. Tap changing at bulk power delivery substations and at distribution voltage regulators will not occur because ofthe faster regulation ofthe high voltage system. Voltage | 9.3 Solutions: Transmission System 213 241.5/V3 Tr 14 series groups, 20parallelcapacitors. : 9.96-kV,200-kVAr capacitors _ Current eae ae limiting = reactor PTfor votage _2 vacuum differential relay Fig. 9-2. Shorting ofcapacitor series groups for Bonneville PowerAdminis- tration 168 MVAr shunt capacitor bank atOlympia Substation. sensitiveload will, however, be restored faster andundervoltage load shed- ding won't be as effective. The tap changing will sag the EHV voltage.

This can be compensated for by capacitor bank insertion, tripping ofshunt reactors, and control of EHV-side voltage at generators. Tokyo Electric Power Company has devel- oped a microprocessor-based controller for coordinated control ofcapacitor bank switching and network transformer tap changing . As described in Chapter 7, Section 5, fast switching ofshunt capacitor banks or shunt reactors following a disturbance can prevent the longer- term voltage instability mechanism from even starting. This may require use ofremote signals. Anothercontrol is automatic line reclosing following shortcircuitclear- ing. In contrast to high speed reclosing for transient stability, automatic line reclosing forthe slower forms ofvoltage instability neednotbe as fast. For instance, ten seconds delay allows time for synchronizing oscillations os 214 Chapter 9,Power System Planningand OperatingGuidelines 200 BS w/series group = 180+ shorting = & 160 oO 2 8 140 8 < 8 120 w/o series group shorting [S) 100-p 0.8 0.9 1 11 1.2 Voltage - pu of 230-kV Fig. 9-3. Capacitor bank characteristic with and without shorting ofthree series groups at0.98 pu voltage. and generator torsional oscillations to damp out. The longer delay increases the chance for successful reclosing since more time is available for arc deionization. Automatic reclosing should be faster than capacitor switching, tap changing, or load shedding. Circuit breaker synchronizing check relays, ifused, should notbe set too restrictively. Protective relaying. Many blackouts have been caused by protective relays operatingonoverload—their purpose is tooperate forshortcircuits. On main grid lines, zone 3 impedance relays are usually the cause. With redundant relay sets, and with breaker failure relaying and bus protection (local backup), there is little need to apply zone 3 relays. Get rid ofthem. On subtransmission lines, overcurrent relays may be used in place of impedance relays. Make sure they won’t operate on overload.

Apparent impedance and line current should be monitored in simulation programs. The December 19, 1978 French voltage collapse (Appendix F) was trig- gered by tripping of a critical 400-kV line by an overload relay. The line tripped with 20 minutes time delay after the overload relay operated and gave an alarm. When an overloaded line is in danger ofdamage, real-time or dynamic line thermal rating equipment [15,16] can prevent unnecessary line trip- ping. The line capability is based on ambient conditions (temperature, 9.4 Solutions: Distribution and Load Systems 215 wind, etc.). Due to the favorable ambient conditions, real-time line ratings areespecially valuable forwintertime voltage stability situations. Operation. During heavy load and emergency conditions, operators must use the means at theirdisposal (e.g., capacitor bank and reactorswitching) to keep transmission voltages as high as allowed. During load buildup, capacitorbanks must be appliedearlyto“keep under the voltage.” HVDC transmission. HVDC power control should be used to improve voltage stability. In some cases, fast powerincrease isneeded. For example, forthe western NorthAmericaninterconnection shown on Figure 5-10,out- age of the Pacific HVDC Intertie causes voltage stability problems in Northern California . Fast power increase on the Intermountain Power Project would relieve overload on the PacificAC Intertie, and improve volt- age stability. As described in Chapter 8, fast reduction ofDC power isoften required to release reactive power into the power system. Controls to reduce direct current and power for low ac voltage can improve voltage stability, as can inverter controls to regulate ac voltage. 9.4 Solutions: Distribution and Load Systems Voltage stability is essentially load stability where the “load” is that seen from the bulk power system. This “load” includes the subtransmission and distribution systems.

Effective solutions to voltage stability problems can be found at the problem source. Planning, simulationstudies. Upgrading subtransmission and distribu- tion circuits, perhaps forenergyconservation, will help voltage stability by reducingfeederimpedances. Use ofhighervoltage distribution circuits will help. Detailed representation of subtransmission systems is desirable for voltage stability studies. Representation may include equivalents for feeder impedances, representation of non-utility generation, and dynamic motor equivalents. Capacitorbanks. Shunt capacitor banks should usually be located on the regulated side of LTC voltage regulators. The shunt capacitor banks are then constant reactive powersources. Control of voltage by switched shunt capacitors or series capacitors, rather than LTC transformers and distribution voltage regulators, will improve voltage stability. os 216 Chapter 9, Power System Planning and Operating Guidelines Capacitor banks controlled by current, reactive power, time, ortemper- ature shouldhavebackup, voltage-based control. Capacitorbanks will then be inserted forbulk power system problems. Tap changing. A particularly simple and often effective method to improve voltage stability is to block LTC transformer tap changing for low unregulated side (transmission side) voltage. This is most effective at sub- stations serving high power factor loads; for highly shunt compensated loads, benefits may be small or negative. Ifthe load is some distance from the LTC transformer, tap changer blocking mayalso be counterproductive. Ontario Hydro has implemented tap changer blocking on fourteen transformer stations in the Ottawa area [4, page 178]. Tap changers are blocked when the high side voltage (230-kV or 115-kV) drops belowa set value for a specified time. Tap changing is unblocked when voltage has recovered to stable values for a specified time.

The tap changer blocking controls are coordinatedwith automatic reclosing, capacitor switching, and load shedding. Blocking tap changers to allow distribution voltage to fall will result in loss of load diversity as thermostats regulate constant energy loads. This could be significant in wintertime voltage stability situations. Blocking tap changers would, however, allow time for other actions. Blocking tap changers may be less cost-effective ifnumerous distribu- tion voltage regulators are used rather than large LTC bulkpower delivery transformers. An alternative is to allow tap changing only one or two boost steps above the value normally reached during heavy load conditions. Another alternative is to use longintentional time delays between individ- ual tap steps as discussed in Chapter 4, Section 4. This allows more time for corrective action. Wider tap changer bandwidth settings could also be considered. If two or more tap changer transformers or regulators are in series, operation should be coordinated so that the tap changing closerto the load has a much longertime delay. Voltage reduction. As described in Chapter 4, voltage reduction during critical conditions is widely used to obtain load relief. For voltage stability, the reduction in reactive power load may be particularly significant. Because ofdistribution transformers operating in saturation, a 1% reduc- tion in voltage may causea sustained reduction in reactive power load by 4-7%. Undervoltage load shedding. Undervoltage load shedding [18-19] is a cost-effective, decentralized voltage stability solution for infrequent distur- bances. It’s a valuable backup for primary solutions to voltage stability 9.4 Solutions: Distribution and Load Systems 217 problems. Undervoltage load shedding removes aburden from systemoper- ators who otherwise might be required to rapidly shed load manually during emergencies. It allows operators to take more risk in achieving economic system operation.

The timedelay mustbe short (1—1.5 seconds) to prevent stalling ofinduction motors during the final phase ofvoltage insta- bility . Ifmost ofthe load is static and highly voltage sensitive (heating and lighting), the time delays may be longer. The undervoltage relays should respond to balanced, positive sequence voltage drops, or be blocked from operating for unbalanced conditions. Several utilities have implemented undervoltage load shedding programs . Reference 19 describes a system installed in 1981 by the Tennessee ValleyAuthority to protect against transient voltage instability in an area with high air conditioning load. The relays, installed at nine 161-kV substations, have time delays between 60 and 105 cycles. During the summer of 1987, the system prevented voltage collapse on three occa- sions. Chapter 7, Section 4 describes undervoltage load shedding installed in the Puget Sound area ofthe Pacific Northwest to prevent longer-term volt- age collapse. The loads are highly voltage sensitive and the time delays are not critical. Similar undervoltage load shedding is planned forthe Portland load area. Direct load tripping. Direct detection ofmajor contingencies can initiate tripping ofload. In the Puget Sound area, for example, outage of 500-kV cross-Cascade Mountain 500-kV lines during heavy load conditions ini- tiates tripping of aluminum reduction plant load. This system, however, will be phased out with the installation ofundervoltage load shedding and othersystem additions. Florida Powerand Light Company had developed the FastActingLoad Shedding (FALS) program which runs at their system control center . The system differentiates between generation loss below andabove approx- imately 1200 MW, and initiates 800 MW of load shedding for generation loss above 1200 MW. The load shedding occurs about twenty seconds after the outage. The load is shed before load restoration by tap changing and before field current limitingatgenerators.

Thetimedelay allows automatic switching of transmission shunt capacitor banks; this may eliminate the need for load tripping. There is a similar system for transmission corridor outages called Corridor FastActingLoad Shed(CFALS). Direct load control and distribution automation. We would like to shed load less disruptively than by direct load tripping or undervoltage load shedding, [18,22]. Rapidly turningoffair conditioners, water heaters, electric heating, or other load for five to twenty minutes during an emer- 218 Chapter9, PowerSystem Planning and Operating Guidelines gency is attractive. For longer-term voltage stability, extremely fast action is notrequired—tens ofseconds orminutes are available. The controlspro- vide load relief, and the time needed to start gas turbines or reschedule generation. One concept is forthe utility to communicate emergency condi- tions to consumer microprocessors by a large increase in the current cost of electricity . Thermostat settings orload demand wouldthenbe changed to reduce consumption. Many utilities have implemented or are considering direct load control which is a type ofdemand side management. The requirements for emer- gency load shedding are sensitive methods to detect impeding voltage col- lapse, and fast communications and actuators. The technology forfast load reliefis available today , butwidespread use offiber optics andcompre- hensive communication systems such as ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Networks) will improve feasibility in the near future—at least for industrial andcommercial loads. Direct load control can be initiated based on activation of reactive power reserve atgenerators and static varcompensators. As previously dis- cussed, reactive power reserve activation is a sensitive indicator ofimped- ingvoltage instability. Direct load control can also improve voltage stability through switched capacitor bank control, tap changer control, and voltage reduction.

Future coordinated distribution networkandtransmission network control can aid bulk power system problems. Direct load control can be used for inexpensive testing ofload charac- teristics. Capacitor banks can be switched offby SCADA to lower voltage, and the resulting active and reactive power response of the loads can be monitored and analyzed at control centers. Voltage reduction controls can be used forthe same purpose. 9.5 Power System Operation After system planners, system engineers, design engineers, and control engineers have developed a power system—probably with a plethora of emergency controls—the burden falls on system operators to balance sys- tem reliability against economics. Voltage security problems greatly adds tothe burden. Automation and computers,while relieving much ofthebur- den, increases the complexity ofpower system operation. Referring to our classification ofvoltage stability shown on Figure 2-1, it’s clear that operators cannot act fast enough for transient voltage stability. For longer-term voltage stability, it’s questionable whetheropera- tors should be asked to perform corrective control in the first several min- utes following a major disturbance. The operator’s role is rather to ensure 9.5 PowerSystem Operation 219 that the power system predisturbance state is secure for the most probable disturbances. For longer-term voltage stability involving load buildup, however, operators have an important role. In keeping a secure predisturbance state, operators may have to reschedule generation, switch capacitor banks, or ordervoltage reductions. Duringanabnormally large load buildup, orduring insecure operation due to equipment outages, operator mayneed to shed load. For the generation system and for the transmission system, we have already discussed some operational aspects. Energy Management Systems. In orderto make critical decisions, opera- tors need the best possible information.

Energy Management Systems (EMS) provide a variety ofmeasured and computed data. State estimation methods are commonly used to filtermeasured data to provide the network static“state” consistingofvoltage magnitudes and angles. State estimation is valuable in that power flow model inaccuracies, particularly involving reactive power flow, are resolved. In comparing off-line power flows with real system power flow, difficulty in matching reactive power flows are often encountered, implyingmodel errors for voltage stability studies. State estimation provides the system model for security assessment software . Voltage security software is being developed and will be an important partofenergymanagement systems. For a given operating condition, possibly with unusual combinations of outages and power flows, fast contingency screening and ranking is often desired. Reference 27 describes some methods for voltage security. Contin- gency screening and ranking is followed by more detailed analysis of the most critical contingencies. Various computer methods have been developed to assist the operator in “reactive power management” andvoltage control. Mostmethods involve optimization ofeconomics (transmission system active power loss minimi- zation) subjecttovoltage magnitude constraints . “Security-constrained optimization” ensures voltage magnitude andother constraints are met for first contingencies. At present, their value for voltage stability/security monitoring is limited since, for example, they usually don’t include voltage stability constraints such as requirements for reactive power reserve. Development ofnew software, however, is underway. Artificial intelligence is another approach tocentralized reactive power andvoltagecontrol. For example,wehave stressed the need toapply capac- itor banks so that generators operate near unity power factor; an expert system could assist operators.

For voltage stability, the UniversityofLiége and Electricité de France are investigating a decision tree method . Many expert system methods arebeingdeveloped . 220 Chapter 9, PowerSystem Planning and Operating Guidelines Specific to voltage stability, especially longer-term voltage stability, several utilities have EMS functions to guide operator actions. Because of time constraints, static (powerflow) analysis methods and artificial intelli- gence methods will likelypredominate forat leastthe nearfuture. To date, computed P-Vcurves are the most widely used method ofesti- mating voltage security, providingmegawatt margin typeindices. Reference 31 describes the voltage security monitoring and voltage security assessment system implemented in February 1990 by Tokyo Elec- tric Power Company. On-line voltage security monitoring runs at intervals ofone minute anddisplays P-Vcurves forconditions one minutebefore, for the present time, and for ten minutes in the future. Reactive power reserves are displayed for the same times, along with guidance forcontrol. The voltage security assessment runs contingencies cases in the morning forthe daily peak load conditions. References 32 and 33 describe voltage security monitoring systems developed, respectively, bytheNational GridCompany (U. K.)andElectric- ité de France. Both systems determine the distance to the maximum load- ability point (P-V curve critical point) by the extended sensitivity computation approach developed by Flatabg . At least for the EdF sys- tem, emphasis is on longer-term voltage instability due to load buildup. A different approach is used in the Belgium national control center. A fast optimization method is used to determine the maximum reactive power load ofan area (nose ofQ-Vcurve for a load area) . The reactive power margin between the operating point and the maximum reactive power is an indication of voltage security or robustness for longer-term voltage stability involving large disturbances.

Post-disturbance MW or MVAr margins should be translated to pre- disturbance operating limits thatoperators can monitor. Voltage stability indices are categorized and further described in Appendix B. Besides software application programs, direct monitoring of key volt- age security indicators may be very effective. The EMS could provide oper- ator displays of generator capability curves, with indication of current operating point andthe targetoperatingarea. As preventive control, opera- tors would switch reactive power compensation to maintain fast-acting reactive power reserves at generators, synchronous condensers, and SVCs. Real-time updating ofgenerator capabilitycurves maybe desirable in some cases. Centralized emergency controls. For longer-term voltage stability, control actions sometimes mustbe taken within a minute following the dis- turbance. A strong argument can be made for decentralized local controls 9.6 Summary: theVoltage Stability Challenge 221 such as generator regulation ofhigh-side voltage, voltage switched capaci- tor banks and shunt reactors, local voltage (unregulated-side) based tap changer blocking, and undervoltage load shedding. Nevertheless, there are reasons for dispatch center based centralized controls. Since there is insufficient time for algorithmic-based computa- tions, controls must be pre-programmed based on off-line studies. Several artificial intelligence approaches have been proposed. Lachs, et al. pro- pose a relatively simple expert system approach. Van Cutsem, et al. propose a decision tree approach. In both methods, emergency actions are taken based mainly on measured change of generator and SVC reactive power, and change of voltage magnitudes. Among other actions, artificial intelligence could beused to triggerdistribution automation actions. As shown inChapter 7, Section 5, centralized automatic voltage control can be more sensitive to disturbances than purely local voltage magnitude based control.

In addition to reactive power and voltage measurements, control canbe based on direct detection ofmajor outages. The Florida Power and Light FALS system described above is one example. EMS software for voltage stability and centralized emergency controls for voltage stability are areas of high current interest, with considerable research and development in progress. Training. Both control center andpower plant operators should betrained in the basics ofvoltage stability. They should know how to recognize volt- age emergencies, and know what emergency actions may have tobe taken. Operator actions for voltage stability are an extension ofvoltage and reac- tive powercontrol actions fornormal conditions. Training ideally should include operator training simulator sessions. References 38-40 describe the recentlydeveloped EPRI training simulator. This is a real-time dynamic model ofthe power system that interfaces with utility energy management system controls such as automatic generation controls. Only the slower uniform system frequency dynamics are repre- sented. Reference 41 describes useofthe simulator atPhiladelphia Electric Company for restoration followingavoltage collapse. 9.6 Summary: theVoltage Stability Challenge Voltage stability is likely to challenge utility planners andoperators forthe foreseeable future. As load grows, and as new transmission and load-area generation becomes increasingly difficult to build, more and more utilities will face the voltage stability challenge. The relatively recent problem of solar magnetic disturbances adds another dimension that is important for manyutilities.” 222 Chapter 9, PowerSystem Planning and Operating Guidelines Fortunately, many creative people are working on new analysis meth- ods and on innovative solutions to the voltage stability challenge. The subject is beingapproached frommanyviewpoints. Thereis need, however, to involve others, such as distribution automation engineers.

Voltage sta- bility is essentially load stability, and many ofthe cost-effective solutions involve loadcontrol. References 1. M. V. F. Pereira and N. J. Balu, “Composite Generation/Transmission Reliabil- ity Evaluation,” Proceedings ofthe IEEE, Vol. 80, No. 4, pp. 470-491, April 1992. 2. CIGRE WorkingGroup 38.01, “Planning Against Voltage Collapse,”Electra, pp. 55-75, March 1987. 3. J.D. McCalley,J. F. Dorsey, Z. Qu,J. F. Luini,andJ. L. Filippi, “ANewMethod- ology for Determining Transmission Capacity Margin in Electric Power Systems,” JEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 944-951, August 1991. 4, IEEE CommitteeReport, VoltageStability ofPowerSystems:Concepts, Analyti- calTools, andIndustry Experience, IEEE publication 90TH0358-2-PWR, 1990. 5. B. Gao, G. K. Morison, and P. Kundur, “Voltage Stability Evaluation Using Modal Analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 1529-1542, November 1992. 6. W. B. Jervis, J. G. P. Scott, and H. Griffiths, “Future Application ofReactive Compensation Plant on the CEGB System to Improve Transmission Network Capability,”CIGRE,Proceedings of33rdSession, Vol. II, paper38-06, 1988. 7. F. lliceto, E. Cinieri, F. Gatta, andA. Erkan, “Optimal Use ofReactive Power Resources for Voltage Control in Long Distance EHV Transmission: Applica- tions tothe Turkish420-kV System,”CIGRE, Proceedings of33rdSession, Vol. II,paper 38-03, 1988. 8. H. Kirkham and R. Das, “Effects of Voltage Control in Utility Interactive Dispersed Storage and Generation Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus andSystems, Vol. PAS-103,No. 8, pp. 2277-2282,August 1984. 9. P. B. Johnson, S. L. Ridenbaugh, R. D. Bednarz, and K. G. Henry, “Maximizing the Reactive Capability ofAEP Generating Units,” Proceedings ofAmerican Power Conference, pp. 373-377,April 1990. 10. Compacting Overhead Transmission Lines, Proceedings ofCIGRE Symposium, Leningrad, 3-5June 1991. 11.

Electric Power Research Institute, Transmission Line Reference Book, 345 kV andAbove, second edition, 1982(preparedbyGeneral Electric Company). *Geomagneticstorms causequasi-de currents toflowina path which includesgrounded transformers andtransmission lines. Transformersatu- ration duetothequasi-de currentresults inlowvoltagesandharmonic generation. Shuntcapacitors banksareharmonic current sinks, and may overload and trip. References 223 12. IEEE Committee Report, “VAR Management—Problem Recognition and Con- trol,”IEEETransactionsonPowerApparatusandSystems,Vol.PAS-103, No.8, pp. 2108-2116,August 1984. 13. C. W.Taylor, “ANovel MethodtoImprove Voltage Stability using ShuntCapac- itors,”Proceedings: Bulk PowerSystem Voltage Phenomena II—Voltage Stabil- ityandSecurity, DeepCreekLake, Maryland,pp. 395-401,4-7August 1991. 14. S. Koishikawa,S.Ohsaka,M. Suzuki, T. Michigami, andM.Akimoto, “Adaptive Control ofReactive Power SupplyEnhancingVoltage Stability of a Bulk Power Transmission System and a New Scheme of Monitor on Voltage Security,” CIGRE, paper38/39-01, 1990. 15. R. A. Moraio, S. D. Foss, and H. Schraushuen, “Thermal Line Rating for Improved Transmission System Utilization,” Power Technology International 1991,pp. 41-48. 16. L. Cibulka, W. J. Steeley, and A. K. Deb, “PG&E’s ATLAS (Ambient TemperatureLineAmpacitySystem)Transmission LineDynamicThermal Rat- ing System,”CIGRE, paper22-102, 1992. 17. W. Mittelstadt, C. Taylor, M. Klinger, J. Luini, J. McCalley, andJ. Mechenbier, CnltageInstability Modeling and Solutions as Applied to the Pacific Intertie,” CIGRE, paper38-230, 1990. 18. C. W. Taylor, “Concepts ofUndervoltage Load Shedding for Voltage Stability,” IEEETransactions onPowerDelivery, Vol. 7,No. 2, pp. 480-488,April 1992. 19. cHa.tiMo.nShuhandJ. R. Cowan, “UndervoltageLoadSheddinAgn UltimateAppli- for Voltage Collapse,” Georgia Institute ofTechnology 46thAnnual Pro- tectiveRelayingConference,April29-May 1, 1992. 20.

IEEE Power System Relaying CommitteeWorkingGroupK12,“SystemProtec- tionandVoltage Stability,” Draft5, September 1992. 21. S.A. Nirenberg, D.A. McInnis,and K. D. Sparks, “FastActing Load Shedding,” IEEETransactions onPowerSystems, Vol. 7,No. 2, pp. 873-877,May 1992. 22. C. W. Taylor, “Solving Bulk Transmission System Security Problems with Dis- tributionAutomation,” Proceedings, ThirdInternationalSymposium on Distri- bution Automation and Demand Side Management,” January 11-13, 1993, PalmSprings, California. 23. M. G.Adamiak,D. C. Roberts, andS. D. Ketz, “AMicroprocessor-Based System forthe Implementation ofVariable SpotPricingofElectricity,”IEEEComputer ApplicationsinPower, pp.43-48, October 1990. 24. H. E. Caldwell, Jr., “Load Management Reaches for the Stars,” Transmission andDistribution, pp. 58-62,February 1991. 25. Special issueonIntegratedServicesDigitalNetworks,ProceedingsoftheIEEE, Vol. 79, No. 2,February 1991. 26. N. Balu, T. Bertram,A. Bose, V. Brandwajn, G. Cauley, D. Curtice,A. Fouad,L. Fink, M. G. Lauby,B. F. Wollenberg, andJ. N. Wrubel,“On-Line Power System SecurityAnalysis, Proceedings oftheIEEE, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 262-280, Febru- ary 1992. . 27. G. C. Ejebe, H. P. Van Meeteren, and B. F. Wollenberg, “Fast Contingency ScreeningandEvaluation forVoltageSecurityAnalysis,”IEEETransactionson PowerSystems, Vol. 3, No.4,pp. 1582-1590, November 1988. 28. O.Alsac, J. Bright,M. Prais, and B. Stott, “Further Developmentsin LP-Based Optimal Power Flow,”JEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 697-711,August 1990. 224 Chapter9, PowerSystem Planning and Operating Guidelines 29. L. Wehenkel, T. Van Cutsem, B. Heilbronn, and M. Goubin, “Decision Treesfor Preventive Voltage Stability Assessment,” Proceedings: Bulk Power System VoltagePhenomena II—VoltageStabilityandSecurity, DeepCreekLake, Mary- land, pp. 229-240, 4~7August 1991. 30. CIGRE Task Force38-06-01, Expert Systems Applied to Voltage & VAr Control, 1991. 31. M. Suzuki,S. Wada, M.

Sato, T.Asano, andY. Kudo,“Newly Developed Voltage Security MonitoringSystem,”IEEE Transactions on PowerSystems, Vol. 7, No. 3,pp.965-973,August 1992. 32. A. O. Ekwue, R. M. Dunnett, N.T. Hawkins, andW. D. Laing,“On-LineVoltage Collapse Monitor,” Proceedings: Bulk Power System Voltage Phenomena II— Voltage Stability and Security, Deep Creek Lake, Maryland, pp. 253-255, 4-7 August 1991. 33. Cto.rLemaitre,J. P.Paul, J.M.Tesseron,Y.Harmand,andY. S.Zhou,“An Indica- oftheRiskofVoltage Profile InstabilityforReal-Time ControlApplications,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 154-161, February 1990. 34. N. Flatabg, R. Ognedal,andT. Carlsen, “Voltage Stability Conditionin aPower Transmission System Calculated by Sensitivity Methods,” JEEE Transactions onPowerSystems, Vol. 5, No.4,pp. 1286-1293, November 1990. 35. T. VanCutsem,“AMethodtoCompute ReactivePowerMargins withRespectto Voltage Collapse,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. PWRS-6, No. 2, pp. 145-156,February 1991. 36. W. Lachs,Y. L.Zhou, D.Stannite, andI. F.Morrison,“AutomaticControl ofSys- temVoltage StabilitybyanExpert System,”Proceedings ofTenthPowerSystem Computing Conference, Graz, Austria, pp. 1057-1064, Butterworths, London, 1990. 37. T. Van Cutsem, L. Wehenkel, M. Pluvial, B. Heilbronn, and M. Goubin, “Deci- sion Trees for Detecting Emergency Voltage Conditions,” Proceedings: Bulk Power System Voltage Phenomena II—Voltage Stability and Security, Deep CreekLake, Maryland, pp. 217-228, 4-7August 1991. 38. Operator TrainingSimulator, EPRIFinal Report EL-7244, May 1991, prepared byEMPROS Systems International. 39. M. Prais, G. Zhang, A. Bose, and D. Curtice, “Operator Training Simulator: Algorithms andTestResults,”IEEETransactions onPowerSystems, Vol.4,No. 3, pp. 1154-1159,August 1989. 40. M. Prais, C. Johnson, A. Bose, and D. Curtice, “Operator Training Simulator: Component Models,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 1160-1166,August 1989. 41. R. F. Chu, E. J.

Dobrowolski, E. J. Barr, J. McGeehan, D. Scheurer, and K. Nodehi, “Restoration Simulator Prepares Operators for Major Blackouts,” IEEEComputerApplications inPower,Vol. 4,No. 4, pp.46-51, October 1991. Appendix A Notes on the Per Uni.t System In everyday life, per cent is widely used to increase understanding. For example, on August 19, 1991 following the short-lived coup d’état in the Soviet Union, the Tokyo (Nikkei) stock market index dropped 5.95%. The 5.95% drop corresponded to 1357.61 points—a number which is meaning- less to mostofus. Per unit is a percentage value divided by 100. In engineering, scaling or normalizing of physical values is often useful. In power system analysis, a per unit (pu) system is used to express a physical variable as a fraction of a base or reference value. The base value is usually a rated orfull-load value. We state: pu value in physical units value = ———— += _e base value in same physical units Per unit is commonly used for voltage, current, impedance, and power. In power flow and related calculations or computation, base apparent power is invariant. Base voltage varies because oftransformation between several voltage levels. Base current and impedance at a point in the network are calculated oncebase power and voltage are specified. For three-phase systems, the methods and formulas are provided in several books on power system analysis. For reference, we provide the following formulas. The normal conventions ofthree-phase power and line- to-line voltage are used. Base current from S,,,.. = BVbase base Z Vise base So Toconvert from one impedance base toanother, the formula is: Z, =Z [ea]° (=| basenew baseold| 7 S basenew baseold 226 AppendixA,Notes on the Per Unit System The base apparent power depends on the problem at hand. Examples are: * When dealing with a single piece ofequipment such as a gener- ator, motor, transformer, or SVC, the equipment MVA (or MvVar) rating is used.

The same base is used when the equip- ment is connected to a large power system, e.g., the one machine toinfinitebus problem. , * The system shortcircuit capacity may be thebase. Dividing the short circuit capacity by the equipment rating gives the short circuit ratio. The inverse ofthe short circuit ratio is the théve- nin reactance in perunitoftheequipment rating. ¢ For calculations involving atransmission line, the surge imped- ance loading is most appropriate. The base impedance is the surge impedance. ¢ For calculations or computer programs involving a power sys- tem with several or many components, the base MVA must, unfortunately, be chosen arbitrarily. The commonly used 100 MVA base is appropriate for lower voltage parts of a system, but inappropriate for EHV parts of the system (the surge impedance loading of500-kV lines is around 1000 MW.) Advantages ofthe perunit system are: * Voltages have the same range in perunit (i.e., 1+0.05 pu) in all parts ofa system from EHVto distributionand utilization. ¢ When expressed in perunit, apparatus parameters usually fall in fairly narrow range regardless ofapparatus size. For exam- ple, generator reactances in per unit are similar for both 100 MVA machines and 1000 MVA machines. This facilitates data checkingand hand calculations. ¢ Analysis and computation for synchronous machines is greatly facilitated. Selection ofbase rotor quantities is quite involved. The companion book Power System Stability and Control describes perunit representation ofsynchronous machine. ¢ Ideal transformers with nominal turns ratios are eliminatedby the per unit system. ¢ The 3 factor in three-phase circuitcalculations is eliminated. There are some disadvantages of the per unit system and some circum- stances where the system is not needed. ¢ Fortransmission lines, it’s the values ofimpedancesand admit- tances in physical units (e.g., ohms/km) that are of the same magnitude regardlessofvoltage level orMVArating.

AppendixA, Notes on the Per Unit System 227 ¢ For de transmission, there is noneed forconvertingto per unit. ¢ The equation for three-phase power is not the same in per unit as in physical units. The engineer tends to forget about J3 factors when usingphysical units. * Other normalization is sometimes better. For example, the inertia ofrotating machines is normalized by dividing by the machine MVA rating. The units of the resulting inertia con- stant, H, are MW-seconds/MVAor seconds. Appendix B Voltage Stabiloyi:ty and the Power Flow Problem The power flow (load flow) problem is at the heart ofpower system analy- sis. Similarnetwork solution techniques are used forsteadystate programs (power flow program, short circuit program) and dynamic programs. The power flow problem is very closely associated with voltage stability analy- sis. Much of the literature and research on voltage stability deals with power flow computation methods. This appendix summarizes, for non- programmers, basics of this specialized subject. Books on power system analysis introduce the subject; Debs , Arrillaga and Arnold , and Dommel provide detailed descriptions. We provide additional refer- ences. The power flow problem solves the complex matrix equation YvV=I s ve (B.1) Yis the network nodal admittance matrix, Vis the unknown complex node voltage vector, Iis the nodal current injection vector, and S = P+jQ is the apparent power nodal injection vector representing specified load and generation at nodes. Equation B.1 is supplemented by equations for area interchange control or AGC, generator reactive power limits, bus voltage control, tap changer control, HVDC links, static var compensators, etc. These equations are sometimes calledthe control equations.

The Newton-Raphson method and fast decoupled methods are the two main ways ofsolvingthe powerflow problem. 230 Appendix B, Voltage Stability and thePower FlowProblem BA The Nodal Admittance Matrix We assume balanced three-phase operation, allowing “per phase” or posi- tive sequence representation. The nodal admittance matrix models the network. The diagonal terms, Y,,, are the sum of all admittances con- nected to node k, including admittances to ground. Impedance loads are included in Y,,. The off-diagonal terms, Y,,,, are the negated sum of admittances between nodes k andm. Note that off-diagonal terms, Y,,,,, are non-zeroonly ifthere is a direct connection between nodes k and m. In large power systems, substation busses (nodes) are directly connected bytransmission lines ortransformers to only a few other busses. Therefore, the nodal admittance matrix is extremely sparse—most ofthe off-diagonal terms are zeros. In large-scale programs, coding toexploit sparsity is vital. The zero terms are not stored, nor used in computations. Example B-1. Calculate the nodal admittance matrix elements for the three bus system of Figure 6-1 (see Figure B-1). The load hasa resistive component. Use a 100 MVAbase and assumea 238.7/25-kV turns ratio for the transformer between nodes 2 and 3. 300 +j121 MVA Z= 0.1059 238.7/25-kV Slack Bi2 = 0.0924 2 X=0.0167 3/300MW bus! Z=0.1059 Bi2 = 0.0924 Tiss MVAr Tat MVAr Fig. B-1. Three bus network. See Figure 6-1. Solution: The transformer can be represented as a pi equivalent using the model given in Chapter 4. The off-nominal turns ratio is n = 230/238.7 = 0.9636. The matrix elements are: Y\, = j2x (0.0924 -1/0.1059) = -j18.70094 Yq. = Yq, = —j2™ (-1/0.1059) = j18.88574 Yi3 = Ys, = 0 B.2 The Newton-Raphson method 231 + [(n (n- 1)/0.0167 )-n/0.0167 + 1.53] = -j72.76927 Yop = Yy, Yo = ¥gq = i[ (n/0.0167)] = j57.69776 Y3g = 3.0 +j [0.81 —-(n/0.0167 ) — (1—n) /0.0167] = 3.0 -j59.07024 Bus types. Three basic bus ornode types are used: ¢ PQ bus.

A PQ bus is a load bus where the complex (active and reactive) load is specified. The specified load is usually con- stant, reflecting regulation of the load or load voltage. The complex nodevoltage isunknown. ¢ PV bus. A PV bus is a generator bus where active power and voltage magnitude is specified. In the real world, active power and voltage magnitude are kept constant bygenerator controls. The voltage angle at the generator terminals is the unknown. In production-grade programs, the voltage of a remote (e.g. high-side) bus can be constant rather than terminal voltage. Thebus is subjecttogeneratorreactive power limits, andis tra- ditionallyconverted to a PQ bus whenlimits are reached. ¢ Slack bus. One bus must be selected as a reference (voltage angle of zero). Also the difference between estimated and computed losses mustbe assigned to one ormore busses. These two functions are usually assigned to a single large generator bus known as the slack bus. A slack bus is an infinite bus with constantvoltage andunlimited real andreactivepowercapabil- ity. Both the voltage magnitude and angle are thus known at thisbus. Two equations are required for a PQ bus with voltage magnitude and angle as unknowns. One equation is required for a PV bus with voltage angle as unknown. No equation is needed forthe slackbus. B.2 The Newton-Raphson method The most general and reliable algorithm to solve the power flow program is the Newton-Raphson method. It’s a multi-variable formulation ofNewton’s method studied incalculus courses. The method involves iterationbased on successive linearization using the first term of a Taylor expansion of the equations to be solved.

From Equation B.1, we can write the equation for nodek (rowk) as: 232 Appendix B, Voltage Stabilityandthe PowerFlow Problem n i= yyYimVn (B.2) m=1 “ P,-iQ = Ve*I, = Ve* »y YimVn (B.3) m=1 or P,+jQ, = n Y YimVeVin (608 (8), ~ Yom) +581D (On, — Yom) ] (B.4) mel Where 6,,, = 9,-6,, and y,,, = arctan (Bym_/Gym)- We must now distinguish between specified or scheduled powers and powers calculated using Equation B.3 or B.4. The difference is the mis- match which becomes small as convergence of the iterative process is reached. The equations are: cited _p (B5) AP, =pSpecified AQ, = QsPerified _Q, The Newton-Raphson method solves the partitioned matrix equation: g| 48) - |AP (B6) AV AQ whereAPandAQ are mismatch vectors, AVis theunknownvoltage magni- tude correction vector, and A@ is the unknown voltage angle correction vector. J is the Jacobian matrix of partial derivative terms calculated analytically from Equation B.3. In Equation B.4, the voltages are in polar form, which is mostcommon forpowerflow. Jacobian terms. To avoid computation with trigonometric terms, rectan- gular coordinates are used even though the variables are in polar coordi- nates. The following definitions are used: Yam = Gpm+iBem B.2 The Newton-Raphson method 233 Va = eytite Fim tjPem = (Cm+iIfm) (Gam +iBem) = (Gimm ~Bembm) +5 (Bamm +Fambm) B.7) Eight partial derivative terms areneeded—fouroff-diagonal terms and four diagonal terms. The voltage magnitude correction terms are slightly modified to make the equations simpler; compensating terms are in the voltage magnitude correction vector. The partial derivative terms are [2,3,4]: oP, . 7o7 ViVin (Gp SiN8», ~ BjpmCOSOm) = Uembe-Okmee (B-8) ‘m oP, . Vinay = VVin(GCy089m, + Bim SiN A, ,) = Le+ Ompmf(pB.9) m 9Q, oP, 20, ~ Vmay,. (B.10) 0Q, oP, Via = (B.11) eV, 98, oP, 2 %, = -Q,-By,Vi (B.12) oP, Vise = Pat Gu Vi (B.13) *OV, kt ORR 0Q, 38, = P,-G,,V2 (B.14) 2Q, 2 V*vOV,, = Q,k-P-B,R,VR'R (B.15) Example B-2.

Corresponding to Equation B.6, write the matrix equation forthethreebus system shownofExample B-1.Assume node 2isregulated by an SVC modeled as a PVbus. Solution: We have one PV bus and one PQ bus resulting in three unknowns. There is no equation for the slack bus; the slack bus complex 234 AppendixB,Voltage Stability and the Power FlowProblem voltage is used in computing the mismatch powers. The equation is given below. oP, oP, Vv oP, 08, 00, 5aV5 A6, AP, aPyoP V.oP AO, | = |AP3 00, 06, %0V, AV,/Vs AQ, 20s 205 1, 20s 06, 00, *0V, Starting values. In any iterative method, we must first guess a solution. A “flat start” guess for the unknown voltages is usually V, = 1+j0. Complex voltage values from a previously solved similar network could, instead, be used (“base case start”). Ade power flow can be used to obtain initial angle estimates. The BPA power flow program uses several decou- pled powerflow iterations before Newton-Raphson iterations. For ill-condi- tioned cases, good starting values are essential. Solution algorithm. Thebasic steps in solving the powerflow are: 1. Complex voltages at starting values, convert to rectangular coordinates. 2. Compute the a,,, and 6,,,variables. Compute the off-diagonal Jacobian terms using Equations B.8—B.11. 3. Based on Equation B.2, sum the a,,, and 6,,, terms to obtain the current injection at each node. Use Equation B.3 to obtain the calculated active and reactive powerinjections. 4. Use the powerinjections ofstep3 tocomputethe diagonalJaco- bianterms usingEquations B.12-B.15. 5. Use the power injections ofstep 3 andEquation B.5 tocompute the mismatch powers. 6. Ifall mismatch powers are within tolerance, stop iteration and calculate line flows, losses, and other output quantities. Other- wise goto step 7. 7. Solve EquationB.6 using gaussian elimination methods. 8. Update the complex voltages accordingto: new old wool oy Vv Vv AV| B.2 The Newton-Raphson method 235 whereyl provides step size control.

Itis normally equal tounity but is reduced when the power flow is close to non-convergence . 9. Convert new voltages to rectangular coordinates. Go to step 2 for next iteration. The control equations can either be included in the Newton-Raphson iterations orbe enforced outside the main iteration loop [3,5]. ExampleB-3. For thethree bussystem ofExamples B-1 and B-2, compute Newton-Raphson iterations using a flat start. The computations can be done using a spreadsheet ora math CAD program. Solution: The specified voltage magnitudes for nodes 1 and 2 are 1.05 per unit. The initial guess for the state variables are 0, = 0, = 0 and V, = 1.0. Table B-1 show the mismatch variables and the deviation ofthe state variables (Example B-2) for the first three iterations. The final result is 0, = -16.7°, 6, = ~22.4°, and V, = 1.00. Table B-1 a a |AP,,p|e0runit _|_-0.1056786884 | -0.0001315369 AP3, per unit -6.0000000000 0.2159529170 0.0000309655 AQ;, per unit 0.3024075017 | -0.3032039084 | -0.0015803322 A@,, radians -0.2896772684 -0.0026577955 0.0000031588 A@,, radians -0.3892358739 | -0.0023005879 0.0000036727 AV,/V3, per unit | 0.0052539766 | -0.0051209943 | -0.0000272530 Sensitivity analysis. Once convergence is reached, Equation B.6 is a linearized model ofthe network around the solution point. Changes (sensi- tivities) of complex voltages to small changes in real and reactive power can be computed. Sensitivities are total derivatives. The inverse of the Jacobian matrix is, infact, a sensitivity matrix. Sensitivity analysis can be used for design of voltage control and reactive power compensation. For example, the sensitivity for a 100 MVAr reactive power injection at acandidate bus fora shunt capacitorbankaddi- tion can be computed; the voltage increases at nearby busses are obtained. Control options canbe specified to represent snapshots intimefollowingan 236 Appendix B, Voltage Stability and the Power Flow Problem outage.

Area interchange, on-load tap changing, or shunt reactive controls canbeeither active orinactive. Near the nose of a P-V or Q-V curve, sensitivities get very large and then reverse sign. The Jacobian becomes singular at the maximum power point. This is called a bifurcation point. Example B-3. For the three bus system ofour examples, compute the sen- sitivity of a 100 MVAr injection atbus 3. Solution: The 100 MVaAr injection increases the voltage magnitude at bus 3 from 1.000 to 1.017. Voltage magnitudes at the other busses do not change since they are fixed. Other sensitivity formulations are possible to study the effect ofcon- trols [6-9]. Forexample, thechange ingenerator orSVC reactive powerfor a change in load or shunt compensation may be useful (see example in Chapter 6). Without special programming, various sensitivities can be obtained by running a second case with small changes. For example, the reactive load at a bus or group of busses can be increased by a small amount. The resulting change in bus voltages, line flows and generator reactive poweroutputs show howbusses, branches, andgenerators“partic- ipate.”Using starting valuesfrom the first case, convergence will be rapid. For voltage stability, sensitivity analysis must be used with caution. The linearized model is only valid forsmall changes.Anincrease inloading may cause generator current limiting (PV bus changed to PQ bus) and drastic changes in sensitivities. As discussed in Chapter 9, extended sensi- tivity analysis has, however, been developed for voltage stability analysis . The approach includes sensitivity ofgenerator reactive generation fora change in load. The load increase that requires bus type switching (PV to PQbus) and sensitivity matrix recomputation is thus determined. For on-line use, the rapid sensitivity computations are preferred over the modal analysis method describednext.

B-3 Modal Analysis of Power Flow Model The modal or eigenvalue analysis method of Gao, Morison, and Kundur is part ofthe EPRI voltage stability analysis program VSTAB. Modal analysis is akin to sensitivity analysis but the modal separation provides additional insight. VSTAB is a production- grade program for analysis of large systems that has been tested by, and is being used by, several large electric utilitycompanies. The following is taken from Reference 10. Equation B.6 can be rewrit- tenas: B-3 Modal Analysis ofPowerFlow Model 237 re = {Pe dev R (B.16) AQ Jao Jay (AVI where the partitioned Jacobian reflects a solved power flow condition and includes enhanced device modeling. Byletting A P = 0, we can write: AP = 0 = Jp,A0+TpyAV or AC = -IpyTpyAV AQ = [Igy -IqoIpopylAV = SpAV (B.17 where Jp = Wav -JQoFpyIpyl (B.18) Also, AV =Jd,RAQ (B.19) Jp is a reducedJacobian matrix ofthe system. Jp directly relates the bus voltage magnitude and bus reactive power injection. Let A, be the it eigenvalue of Jp with §, and n, the corresponding column right eigenvector and row left eigenvector, respectively. The i” modal reactive powervariation is AQni = KS; (B.20) where KYB =1 (B.21) J with&,, thej'* element of&,. The corresponding i** modal voltage variation is AVini = FAQ: (B.22) i The magnitude ofeach eigenvalue 4, determines the weakness ofthe corresponding modal voltage. The smaller the magnitude of 4, the weaker the correspondingmodal voltage. If 4, = 0, the i-th modal voltage will col- lapse because any change in that modal reactive power will cause infinite modal voltagevariation. 238 Appendix B, Voltage Stabilityand the Power Flow Problem If all the eigenvalues are positive, the system is considered voltage stable. This isdifferent from dynamic systems where eigenvalues withneg- ative real parts are stable.

The relationship between systemvoltage stabil- ity and eigenvalues of the Jz matrix is best understood by relating the eigenvalues with the V-Q sensitivities ofeach bus (which mustbe positive for stability). Jp can be taken as a symmetric matrix and therefore the eigenvalues of J, are close to being purely real. Ifall the eigenvalues are positive, Jp is positive definite and the V-Q sensitivities are also positive, indicating that the system is voltage stable. The system is considered voltage unstable ifat least one ofthe eigen- values isnegative.Azero eigenvalue ofJz means that the system is onthe verge of voltage instability. Furthermore, small eigenvalues of Jp deter- minethe proximity ofthe system tobeingvoltage unstable. The participation factor ofbus k to mode i is defined as Pri = SeiMiz (7.7) For all the small eigenvalues, bus participation factors determine the areas close to voltage instability. In addition to the bus participations, modal analysis also calculates branch and generator participations. Branch participations indicate which branches are important in the stability of a given mode. This provides insight into possible remedial actions as well as contingencies which may result in loss of voltage stability. Generator participations show which machines must retain reactive reserves toensure stability ofa given mode. For a practical system with several thousand buses it is impractical and unnecessary tocalculate all the eigenvalues. Calculating only themin- imum eigenvalue of Jp is not sufficient because there are usually more than one weak mode associated with different parts ofthe system, and the mode associated with the minimum eigenvalue may not be the most trou- blesome mode as the system is stressed. Them smallest eigenvalues ofJp. arethe m least stable modes ofthe system. Ifthe biggest ofthem eigenval- ues, say mode m, is a strong enough mode, the modes which are not computed can be neglected because they are known to be stronger than modem.

An Implicit Inverse Lopsided Simultaneous Iteration technique is used to compute the m smallest eigenvalues ofJp and the associated right and lefteigenvectors. Similar to sensitivity analysis, modal analysis is only valid for the lin- earized model. Modal analysis can, for example, be applied at points along P-Vcurves orat pointsin time ofa dynamic simulation. References 11 and B.4 Fast Decoupled Methods 239 12 provide example ofmodal analysis and comparison with dynamic simu- lation. B.4 Fast Decoupled Methods Decoupled methods take advantage ofthe physical weak coupling (during normal operation) between active power and voltage magnitude, and reac- tive power and voltage angle. In the Newton-Raphson method this is reflected in small values for the off-diagonal terms in Equation B.16. We could set the off-diagonal terms to zero and then alternately solve the two sub-problems. Good accuracy is insured bythe mismatch equations (Equa- tions B.5 and B.3) which basically means that Kirchoff’s laws must be sat- isfied. Convergence reliability is a key concern. The decoupled techniques in wide-spread use are the “fast decoupled” methods [13,14]. Thesemethods startwith the decoupled Newton-Raphson formulation. Further assumptions lead to constant values for the Jp, and Jay Jacobian matrices. Constant matrices mean that they are computed onlyonce, andthat thetriangular factorization ofgaussian elim- ination is done only once. The fast decoupled equations are: AP/V=B'A6 AQ/V=B'AV (BB1177) The approximations forthe B' and B" constant matrices are: 1. Voltages areset tounity. 2. cosSum el. = ORR ee 5. Terms in B' that mainly affect reactive power such as shunt reactances areomitted. 6. Phase shifter effects in B" and possibly B' are omitted 7. Series resistance in either B' or B" is neglected. The original method neglects series resistance in B' and is called the XB scheme. The newer method neglects series resistance in B" and is called the BX scheme.

Reference 15 provides the exact equations. TheEPRI VSTAB program uses the BX scheme. Fast decoupled methods have significant speed advantages over the Newton-Raphson method. The limitations, however, are important for volt- agestability analysis. Convergence difficulties are experienced in networks with high R/X ratios. This could be important ifequivalents for subtrans- mission anddistribution circuits are modeled. 240 AppendixB,Voltage Stability and the Power Flow Problem Additionally “...the coupled Newton method still has areas of relative strength, such as with very large angles across lines and difficult controls, including special control apparatus that strongly affects MW and MVAr flows” . These limitations are important for the high stress operating conditions of voltage stability analysis. Also in voltage stability analysis, power flow simulation near maximum power points farawayfrom realistic operationis important. A voltage stability related decoupled formulation. Carpentier developed a decoupled method especially suited to voltage stability analy- sis. Van Cutsem has applied the method and shows that the method is a good compromise when the reactive power/voltage magnitude subprob- lem is most important, and when high R/X ratios and high angle differ- ences are present. B.5 —_-Power Flow AnalysisforVoltage Stability The traditional power flow analysis described above uses PV/PQ busgener- ator models. As described in Chapter 5, Section 5.1, conversion from PVbus to PQ bus may not adequately represent generator behavior. Instead, the generator should be modeled asa fixed voltage behind an impedance. The fixed voltage depends on controls, includingoperator actions. Furthermore, the traditional constantpower loadmodels arenot always adequate. System representation should be expanded to include subtrans- mission network and distribution network equivalents, including LTC transformers.

Van Cutsem provides an excellent description ofpower flow models and power flow computation procedures for voltage stability analysis. B.é Voltage Stability Static Indices and Research Areas As already discussed, references 7-10, 17, and 19 describe recent research and development on static analysis of voltage stability. In recent years there has been much additional research. Many of the approaches are described in the proceedings ofspecial conferences on voltage stability held in 1988 and 1991 [20,21]. Only a fewof the approaches areoutlined here— emphasis is on the most recent work. Abasic requirement israpid, reliable powerflow computation even near the maximum power point.Arelated requirementis power step size control incomputingP-Vcurves (i.e., smaller step sizes nearthe nose ofthecurve). One promising approach is the continuation method [22-26], which also allows computation ofthe underside ofP-Vcurves. Reference 26 shows an example oflarge-scale powerflowcomputationwhereapopularconvention- alpowerflow programfailedconvergence somedistance from theP-Vcurve B.6 Voltage Stability Static Indices andResearch Areas 241 nose computed by the continuation method. In computing P-V curves, generation mustbe properlydispatched. Indices. At a particular operatingpoint we want an assessment orindex of voltage security based on power flow models. For on-line applications, the indices would be part of steady-state security assessment. The indices reflect system robustness to withstand outages or load increases. They should be computationally efficient and easy to understand (even by non- engineer operators). Indices ofvoltage security should reflect the probabil- ity ofoutages. CIGRE Task Force38-02-11 categorizes indices asgiven operatingstate based andlarge deviation based. Large deviation indices accountfordiscon- tinuities suchasgeneratorcurrent limiting.

Basedonthesystem’s abilityto withstand load or power transfer increases, a MW or MVAr distance or margin from the operating point to the maximum power transfer point is determined. This can be done by computing a P-V or Q-V curve, or by several methods which compute the maximum power transfer capability directly [18,27-29]. Using a more or less conventional power flow program, the maximum power transfer pointcan befoundbyabinary search without computingan entireP-Vcurve. Given operating state indices are based on a solved power flow case or anactualrealsystemoperatingpoint.Observation ofreactivepowerreserve is a simple and valuable index that can be calibrated to system security. Observation of voltage magnitudes is also useful, but usually is not as sensitive an index as reactive powerreserve. Sensitivity methods based on linearizationaround anoperatingpoint(solvedpowerflowcase)areusually repeated at several points along a P-Vor Q-Vcurve. The indices obtained are more sensitive measures ofsecurity than busvoltages. Sensitivitycom- putations such asthe total changein generator reactive power forachange in demand is one method (Voltage Collapse Proximity Indicator, VCPI). This index changes from near unity at light load to infinity at voltage col- lapse. ThefollowingVCPI-based indices may beuseful : VCPI X20, ara VePIy 248, = a where AQ, is the change in reactive power output atgenerators and SVCs for a change in active or reactive load at bus i. The busses with the largest 242 Appendix B, Voltage Stability and the PowerFlowProblem values of VCPI,; are the mosteffective locations for emergency load shed- ding, and the busses with the largest values of VCPIg; are the most effec- tive locations for reactive power compensation. The eigenvalue ormodal analysis method described above is a sec- ondmethodforgivenoperatingstateindices. Somewhatsimilarmethodem- ploy minimum singular value computations [31-33].

Minimum eigenvalues or minimum singular values are also more sensitive indicators ofvoltage collapse than bus voltages. The indices can be used to determine themega- wattormegavar step size forthe nextpower flow computation. Besides anindex, most ofthe methods [7—10,18,24,27-33] provide addi- tional insight into effective locations for system reinforcements and into ef- fective operatingstrategies. Once an index ora set of indices is chosen, criteria for design and operation, and thresholds for corrective action are required. There are few industryguidelines atpresent forcriteria and thresholds. Other research. One area ofresearch centers on defining voltage control areas . These methods would simplify system design and operation. Other research areas involve optimal power flow techniques and combining powerflow methods with artificial intelligence techniques. The trend is away from purely static traditional models to models and methods incorporating or approximating system dynamics. The maximum power transferpoint (nose ofaP-Vcurve) is not necessarily the instability point. For example, eigenvalue analysis ata given operating state couldbe based on dynamic models. Appendix D describes dynamic analysis. References 1. A. S. Debs, Modern Power Systems Control and Operation, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 1988. 2. J.Arrillagaand C. P.Arnold, ComputerAnalysis ofPower Systems, John Wiley &Sons, Chichester, 1990. 3. H. W_ Dommel,Notes on PowerSystems Analysis, University ofBritish Colum- via, 1975. 4. A. J. Wood and B. F. Wollenberg, Power Generation Operation & Control, John Wiley & Sons,NewYork, 1984. 5. B. Stott, “Review ofLoad-Flow Calculation Methods,”Proceedings oftheIEEE, Vol. 62, No. 7, pp. 916-929,July 1974. 6. W. F. Tinney and H. W. Dommel, “Steady-State Sensitivity Analysis, Proceed- ingsof4thPowerSystems ComputationConference, Report No. 3.1/10, 1972. 7. N. Flatabg, R.

Ognedal, andT.Carlsen, “VoltageStability ConditioninaPower Transmission System Calculated by Sensitivity Methods,” JEEE Transactions onPowerSystems, Vol. 5, No. 4, pp. 1286-1293, November 1990. References 243 8. J. Carpentier, R.Girard,E. Scano, “VoltageCollapseProximityIndicators Com- putedfromanOptimalPower Flow,” Proceedings ofthe8thPowerSystem Com- putingConference, pp. 671-678,August 1984. 9. M. M. Begovic andA. G. Phadke, “Control ofVoltage Stability using Sensitivity Analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 114-123, February 1992. 10. B. Gao, G. K. Morison, and P. Kundur, “Voltage Stability Evaluation Using Modal Analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 1529-1542, November 1992. 11. G. K. Morison, B. Gao, and P. Kundur, “Voltage StabilityAnalysis UsingStatic and Dynamic Approaches,” paper 92 SM 590-0 PWRS, presented at the 1992 IEEE/PESSummerMeeting, Seattle, Washington, July 12-16, 1992. 12. CIGRE Task Force 38-02-10, Modelling of Voltage Collapse Including Dynamic Phenomena, 1993. 13. B.StottandO.Alsac, “FastDecoupled LoadFlow,”IEEETransactions onPower ApparatusandSystems, Vol. 93, pp. 859-869, No. 3,May/June 1974. 14. R.A.M.vanAmerongen,“General-PurposeVersion oftheFastDecoupled Load- flow,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 760-770, May 1989. 15. R. Bacher, discussion ofReference 12,Ibid. 16. B. Stottand O.Alsac,discussion ofReference 12,[bid. 17. J. L. Carpentier, “CRIC,’ a New Active-Reactive Decoupling Process in Load Flows, Optimal Power Flows and System Control,” Proceedings ofthe IFAC Conference on Power Systems and Power Plant Control, Beijing, pp. 59-64, August 1986. 18. T.VanCutsem, “AMethodtoComputeReactivePowerMargins withRespectto Voltage Collapse,” JEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. PWRS-6, No. 2, pp. 145-156,February 1991. 19. T.

Van Cutsem, “Voltage Stability : Fast Simulation and Decision Tree Approaches,”NERC/EPRI Forum onOperational andPlanningAspectsofVolt- ageStability, Breckenridge, Colorado, September 14-15, 1992. 20. Proceedings: Bulk Power System Voltage Phenomena—Voltage Stability and Security,EPRI EL-6183, January 1989. 21. Proceedings:Bulk PowerSystem Voltage Phenomena I]—Voltage Stability and Security, DeepCreekLake, Maryland, 4-7August 1991. (Includes bibliography of182 papers writtenbetween 1988and 1991.) 22. R. Seydel, From Equilibrium to Chaos—Practical Bifurcation and Stability Analysis, ElsevierScience Publishers, North-Holland, 1988. 23. K. Iba, H. Suzuki,M.Egawa, andT.Watanabe, “CalculationofCriticalLoading Conditions with Nose Curve Using Homotopy Continuation Method,” IEEE TransactionsonPowerSystems, Vol. 6,No. 2,pp. 584-593, May 1991. 24, V. Ajjarapu and C. Christy, “The Continuation Power Flow: a Tool for Steady State Voltage StabilityAnalysis,”IEEE Transactions onPowerSystems, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 416-423, February 1992. 25. C. Christy, V. Ajjarapu, and B. Srinivasu, “AnApproach to Study Steady-State Voltage StabilityofLarge Scale Power Systems,”Proceedings: Bulk PowerSys- tem Voltage Phenomena II—Voltage Stability and Security, Deep Creek Lake, Maryland, pp. 333-340, 4-7August 1991. 244 Appendix B, Voltage Stability andthe Power FlowProblem 26. R. W. Roddy and C. D. Christy, “Voltage Stability on the MAPP-MAIN Trans- mission Interface ofWisconsin, NERC/EPRI Forum on Operational and Plan- ning Aspects of Voltage Stability, Breckenridge, Colorado, September 14-15, 1992. 27. F. L. Alvarado, and T. H. Jung, “Direct Detection ofVoltage Collapse Condi- tions,”Proceedings: Bulk Power System Voltage Phenomena—Voltage Stability andSecurity, EPRI EL-6183, January 1989. 28. C. A. Cafiizares and F. L. Alvarado, “Point ofCollapse andContinuation Meth- ods for Large AC/DC Systems,” paper 92 WM 103-2 PWRS, IEEE/PES 1992 WinterMeeting, NewYork, NY,January 26-30, 1992. 29. R.

R.Austria, N. D. Reppen, J.A. Uhrin, M. Patel, andA.Galatic,“Applications of the Optimal Power Flow to Analysis of Voltage Collapse Limited Power Transfer,”Proceedings:BulkPowerSystem VoltagePhenomenaII—VoltageSta- bility andSecurity, DeepCreekLake, Maryland, pp. 311-320, 4-7August 1991. 30. H. Suzuki,StudyGroup 37 discussion, CIGRE, Proceedings of the34thSession, Vol. II, pp. 37-39, 1990. 31. A. Tiranuchit and R. J. Thomas, “APosturing StrategyAgainst Voltage Insta- bilities in Electric Power Systems,”IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 3, No. 1,pp. 87-93,February 1988. 32. P.-A. Léf, T. Smed, G.Andersson, and D. J. Hill, “Fast Calculation ofa Voltage Stability Index,”IEEETransactions onPowerSystems, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 54-64, February 1992. 33. P.-A. Léf, G. Andersson, and D. J. Hill, “Voltage Stability Indices for Stressed Power Systems,” paper 92 WM 101-6 PWRS, IEEE/PES 1992 WinterMeeting, NewYork, NY,January26-30, 1992. 34. R.A. Schlueter, I-PungHu, andTrong-YihGuo,“Dynamic/Static Voltage Stabil- ity Security Criteria,” Proceedings: Bulk Power System Voltage Phenomena II—Voltage Stability and Security, Deep Creek Lake, Maryland, pp. 265-303, 4-7August 1991. Appendix C Power Flow Si. mulati. on Methodology Although voltage stability is a dynamic phenomenon, simpler andless com- putationally intense power flow analysis is very valuable. Power flow anal- ysis is especially appropriate ifmuch ofthe load is non-motor. Power flow simulation has been successfully used for detailed postmortem analysis of actual system events described inAppendix F. Appendix B describes computer methods for power flow programs. Following a disturbance, or during a load buildup, we simulate power flow at snapshots in time. As shown on Figure 2-1, the response time of equipment ranges from less than a second to many minutes. Steady-state analysis is meaningful only for time frames involving the slower phenom- ena.

Assumea large disturbance.A loss ofgeneration disturbance causes a large load-generation imbalance. For transmission outage disturbances, the initial reduction in voltage sensitive load also causesa significant load- generation imbalance. Several points in time are suitable for steady-state analysis: ¢ Ten to thirty seconds following the disturbance. The system should be relatively quiescent with synchronizing swings damped out. On-load tap changer control, overexcitation limit- ing, andautomatic generation control arenotsignificant. Loads are voltage sensitive. The “governor” power flow method described in Chapter 5 should be used. *¢ Two to five minutes following the disturbance. On-load tap changing may be complete. Tap changer regulation near loads causes restoration of voltage sensitive loads. Field current of generators may be reduced to near rated value. Automatic generation control may be complete if the generation-load imbalance is notlarge. 246 Appendix C, PowerFlow Simulation Methodology ¢ Five minutes or longer following the disturbance. Aggregated loads suffering voltage drop may be restored by thermostatic control. AGC, generation rescheduling and economic dispatch, and operator-initiated procedures maybe complete. The time frames are not sharply separated. We must understand the system and the equipment to make reasonable assumptions. For conven- tional power flow programs, we suggest procedures for post-disturbance power flow, V-@ curves, andP-Vcurves. Procedureforlonger-term voltage stability andgovernorpowerflow. We wish to simulate the most onerous moment, i.e., after tap changing and generator current limiting is largely complete, but before slow or manual corrective actions. This momentis often two-threeminutes afterthe distur- bance. Assumptions: 1.

For large generator outages, normal automatic generation con- trol (AGC) will not significantly change generation within a two to three minute time frame—either because ofbeing too slow or because ofbeing intentionally suspended after the disturbance. This means power flow program area interchange control is not active. For heavy load conditions, AGC frequency bias coeffi- cients will be close to area natural regulation andArea Control Errors in external control areas will be small. . 2. All active turbine-generators speed controls have the same droop setting (typically 5%). Deadband/backlash effects are ignored—some hydro governors have vibrating motors (dither modulation) to reduce deadbands. 3. System frequency is uniform and turbine outputs have reached steady-state values. Modeling techniques. 1. The voltage sensitive areas ofthe network are represented in as much detail as feasible. The subtransmission network is repre- sented so that: (a) load and generation are modeled separately (without netting load against generation), (b) subtransmission paths parallel to transmission paths are modeled, and (c) sub- transmission reactive power compensation is modeled sepa- rately from reactive power load. 2. Loads are modeled as voltage sensitive, with load voltage controlled by LTC transformers and switched shunt capacitor Appendix C, Power Flow Simulation Methodology 247 banks. Constant power loads may be used for more approxi- mate simulation. 3. Generators in the voltage sensitive areas have reactive limits modeled as a function oftheir active power loading. Preferably, however, the conventional PV/PQ bus generator model is replaced with a detailed model as described in Chapter 5, Section 1. The detailed model depends on the overexcitation control actually installed, and on any expected operator actions. 4. Static var compensators are modeled so they are capacitors at their boost limit.

They can be modeled asa thyristor controlled reactor, fixed capacitor (TCR-FC)type ofSVC. Procedureforsimulation: 1. Generation-load imbalance should be distributed throughout the interconnection among units with active governors. The imbalance can be distributed in proportion to P,,,, values because we assume that all units have the same droop setting, and see the same frequency deviation. All generators with active governors will pick up their share of generation defi- ciency until they reach their maximum output. Generators loaded to P,,,, or without active governors must not be included in the distribution ofthe imbalance. AGC (power flow area interchange control) can be represented ifthe generation- load imbalance is notlarge. 2. Additional system losses should also be distributed in propor- tion to the P,,,, values for all generators on active governor control. Otherwise, the slack bus generation will compensate for all losses. Several runs may be necessary to determine the losses andthe P,,,,, allocation. 3. The system slack bus should be located far from the area with voltage problems. A nearby slack bus, not having reactive limits, may hold voltages unrealistically high. 4. The effects oftransient stability controls which operate imme- diately following the disturbance are modeled. Controls may include generator tripping, load shedding, sustained fast valv- ing, series capacitor insertion, and shunt capacitor bank switching. 5. Manually controlled or very slow equipment represented in the pre-disturbance power flow as operating automatically should be frozen in the pre-disturbance power flow position—unless there is specific information to do otherwise. Examples include 248 AppendixC, PowerFlow Simulation Methodology shunt capacitor banks and reactors, remote (high side) genera- tor voltage control, and LTC transformers (including phase shifters) that are manually controlled.

Generator voltage regu- lator line drop compensation should be represented where used. 6. Acceptability of the results should be based on criteria that measures the system proximity to voltage instability. A minimum voltage requirement is normally not sufficient to determine proximity to voltage instability. 7. Appropriate sensitivity simulations related to the assumptions are advisable. Procedures for V-Q curves. V-Q curves are one ofthe simplest methods to assess voltage stability. As described in Chapter 2,a fictitious synchro- nous condenser is applied ata testbus. The testbus becomes aPVbus and a series ofvoltages are scheduled. The reactive power output versus volt- age is plotted. V-Q curves can be computed for pre- and post-disturbance conditions and forvarious load modeling assumptions. Somethings to keep in mind are: ¢ An idea behind V-Q (and also Q-V curves) is to test system robustness by adding reactive load. Reactive load and voltage performance are closely related. Van Cutsem discusses this concept. * V-Q curves are used to examine reactive power compensation. The test bus shunt reactive compensation characteristics can be superimposed on the V-Q curves. ¢ The meaningful voltage range is about 0.9 to 1.1 per unit. Mod- eling maybe inadequate outside this range. ¢ Experimentation is required to determine suitable test busses. The best test bus maybedepend on the particulardisturbance. ¢ V-Q curves are most informative when distinct “voltage control areas” can be found. ¢ V-Q curves may apply undue stress at a single bus. Sensitivity cases can be run using Q-V curves where additional reactive load is applied atall load busses in an area. ¢ Superimposing plots ofgenerator reactive poweron V-Q curves provides insight into voltage stability. For large-scale systems, V-Q curves are not very realistic and better methods are now available. Procedures for P-V curves. P-V curves (and S-V or Q-V curves) are a more general methodofassessingvoltage stability.

Load area power can be Appendix C, Power Flow Simulation Methodology 249 increased, or transfer across an interface can be increased by generation redispatch. Some concepts are: ¢ The generation dispatch methods to increase transfer are important and depend on the time frame beingsimulated. ¢ Atpoints alongP-Vcurves, voltage stability can be assessed by linearized system sensitivity analysis or steady-state modal analysis. These methods, described in Appendix B, provide additional insight. ¢ For study of system robustness following a large disturbance, the power transfer is increased for the outage condition. The system ability to withstand additional contingencies or load buildup is assessed. ¢ As load is increased, and ifvoltage sensitive load is considered, the incremental load should be separated from the base load. The incremental load may be temperature-sensitive air condi- tioningor heating load. ‘ ¢ For study ofload buildup, the power transfer is increased for normalconditions. Distance from the nose ofthecurve provides voltage stability margin. The ability to withstand contingencies atdifferent load or transferlevels can alsobe simulated. ¢ P-V curves may be computed for load increase using quasi- dynamic methods. Operation of time-controlled equipment is approximately represented. SeeAppendix D. References 1. T. Van Cutsem,“AMethodtoComputeReactive Power Margins withRespectto Voltage Collapse,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. PWRS-6, No. 2, pp. 145-156, February 1991. Appendix D Dynami.c Analysi.s Methods for Longer-Term Voltage Stabilapiety Interconnected power systems spanning thousands of kilometers are the largest man-made dynamic systems. Voltage stability adds anotherdimen- sion and another layer ofcomplexity to these dynamic systems. Dynamic analysis includes time domain simulation and linearized system analysis (eigenanalysis).

Computer programs (transient stability programs) for dynamic simulation oftransient voltage stability are widely available. In this appendix wediscuss simulation oflonger-term phenomena. Careful power flow analysis is often adequate for simulation of the slower forms of voltage stability. Experts have argued that time domain simulation is not needed for longer-term voltage stability analysis. We offer, however, the following reasons for dynamic simulation ofminutes to tens ofminutes: . 1. Time coordination of equipment where the time frames are overlapping; e.g., generator controls, switched capacitor banks, SVCs, and undervoltage load shedding. For example, the tim- ingofreactive power compensation application can affect final results. 2. Clarification ofphenomena and prevention ofoverdesign. Time domain simulation forces more careful analysis and modeling. 3. Confirmation ofless computationally intensive static analysis. 4. Improved simulation fidelity especially near stability bound- aries. 5. Simulation offast dynamics associated with the final phases of acollapse. 6. Demonstration and presentation of system performance by easy to understand time domain plots showing time evolution ofvoltage stability phenomena. More convincingcertification of system performance. 252 Appendix D, Dynamic Analysis Methods 7. Education andtraining. Modeling. Chapters 3-5 and the companion book Power System Stability and Control provide detailed description ofequipment modeling. Generator current limiting, network voltage regulation, load control, and energy sup- ply systems (e.g., boilers) must be correctly represented. Controls such as automatic generation control (AGC) mustbe modeled. Models for slow area loadincrease maybe needed. Basic models for transient stability are differential and algebraic equa- tions. Controls and relays add logic equations and timers. Digital controls add more complexities such as non-windup integrators oraccumulators.

For longer-term dynamics, tap changing can be thought ofa discontinuous sub- system akinto differenceequations . Switching discontinuities mayoccur frequently in the course oftime domain simulation. Time domain simulation. Several approaches have been taken for effi- cient long-term simulation of the voltage stability of large systems. The simplest and computationally fastest approach is a sequence ofpower flow simulations at appropriate snapshots in time. A new power flow is run whenever a switchingevent, such as transformer tap changing, is required. Load increase overtimecan berepresented. Lachs has used this method. References 3-6 describe recent use of these quasi-dynamic methods. Appropriate power flow modeling is impor- tant and has been incorporated intothe recent programs. The next step in complexityis representing the continuous slow dynam- ies by differential equation models. Generator and motor flux, and electro- mechanical dynamics are ignored (represented algebraically), as are generator excitation system dynamics. Uniform system frequency is assumed with a single “swing equation” for total system electrical and mechanical power. Dynamic (differential equation) models are used for prime movers and prime mover controls. Thermostatic control ofaggregated loads may be represented by dynamic models. Induction disc type relays (or equivalent integrating electronic relays) used for reactive compensation switching or undervoltage load shedding are modeled dynamically. Discrete actions (tap changing, reactive compensation switching, load shedding) are represented with appropriate time delays once switching criteria is met. The EPRI LOTDYS program developed in the 1970s had most of these features. The EPRI Operator Training Simulator program [8-10] is also ofthis type. The Operator Training Simulator is very fast, capable of running relatively large systems in real time. Models for voltage stability analysis are included.

The disadvantage of the uniform frequency method is that fast tran- sients are ignored. One approach is to switch to a conventional transient AppendixD, Dynamic Analysis Methods 253 stability program whenever a major discontinuity such as generator trip- ping occurs. The uniform frequency program is reinitialized and restarted once the fast transients have damped out. Switching back and forth between two programs, however, is cumbersome. An approach to unify short and long-term programs was imple- mented in an early version of the EPRI Extended Transient Mid-Term Stability Program (ETMSP). Artificial damping is added at appropriate times to suppress synchronizing oscillations relative to the center ofiner- tia. The artificial damping can be automatically removed following a switching event. The program uses simultaneous implicit solution algo- rithms with trapezoidal rule integration . The artificial dampingallows time steps to increase from one cycle to as long as one second. Testing of this method was limited to moderately sized systems without induction motor loads. Amore general approach employs variable step size integration meth- ods suitable for “stiff” systems . A stiffsystem ofdifferential equations has a wide range oftime constants. The normal transient stability simula- tion problem is moderately stiff; the long-term dynamics problem is stiff. Complex algorithms are needed to cope with nonlinearities, and switching events such as load shedding and tap changing. The EUROSTAG program implements these methods. Integration step size is automatically controlled and may range from 1 millisecond to 100 seconds. The program is valuable for voltage stability analysis . Eigenvalues can becalculated atquasi-dynamic equilibrium points reached during the time simulation. A different approach is to automatically switch back and forth from dynamic (differential equation) simulation to quasi-steady-state (algebraic) simulation asrequired by system conditions [3,4].

The EPRI ETMSP 3.0 program features implicit integration and comprehensive models for voltage stability and for short and long term analysis of other phenomena. It is capable of simulating very large sys- tems. Small disturbance analysis. For additional insight into the voltage instability mechanism, eigenanalysis can be performed at various points along the time evolution ofvoltage stability. For example, eigenval- ues ofthe linearized system can be computed at a snapshot in time after fasttransients havedamped out. This period could be similarto the“gover- nor” power flow described in Chapter 5. During the time period ofdiscrete tap changing, eigenvalues can be computed to show, say,thedegradation of voltage stability as tap changing continues. Van Cutsem provides an example ofthis technique. This is an alternative (or a complement) to the 254 Appendix D, Dynamic Analysis Methods steady state modal analysis method described in Appendix B. The steady state modal analysis focuses on the transmission network properties while a dynamic formulation focuses on generator and motor instability mecha- nisms. Research areas. Improved software and hardware for simulation oflarge power systems over extended time periods are being developed, driven in partbythe voltage stability challenge. Forexample, we areall aware ofthe tremendous advances ingeneral purpose computerhardware such as RISC workstations. Improvements are being seen in other areas such as parallel processing, supercomputers, artificial intelligence, and Macintosh-style graphical interfaces. The need is for power system simulation software to keep up with the “computer revolution.” References 1. T. Van Cutsem, “Voltage Collapse Mechanisms: A Case Study,” Proceedings: Bulk Power System Voltage Phenomena II1—Voltage Stability and Security, DeepCreek Lake,Maryland, pp.85-101,4-7August 1991. 2. W. R. Lachs, “Dynamic Study ofan Extreme System Reactive Deficit,” JEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol.

PAS-104, No. 9, pp. 2420-2426,September 1985. 3. A. Kurita, H. Okubo, K. Oki, S. Agematsu, D. B. Klapper, N. W. Miller, W. W. Price, J. J. Sanchez-Gasca, K. A. Wirgau, and T. D. Younkins, “Multiple Time- Scale Power System Dynamic Simulation,” paper 92 WM 128-9 PWRS, 1992 IEEE/PES WinterMeeting,NewYork,January 1992. 4. W. W. Price, D. B. Klapper, N. W. Miller, A. Kurita, and H. Okubo, “A Multi- FacetedApproach to Power System Voltage StabilityAnalysis,” CIGRE, paper 38-205, 1992. 5. N. W. Miller, R D’Aquila, K. M. Jimma, M. T. Sheehan, and G. L. Comegys, “Voltage Stability ofthe PugetSound System UnderAbnormally ColdWeather Conditions,” paper92SM534-8 PWRS, presentedatIEEE/PES SummerMeet- ing,July 12-16, 1992. 6. General Electric Company, Long Term Power System Dynamics, EPRI Final Report, Research Project90-7,April 1974. 7. T. Van Cutsem, “Voltage Stability : Fast Simulation and Decision Tree Approaches,”NERC/EPRI Forumon Operational andPlanningAspectsofVolt- ageStability, Breckenridge, Colorado, September 14~15, 1992. 8. Operator TrainingSimulator, EPRI Final ReportEL-7244,May 1991, prepared byEMPROS Systems International. 9. M. Prais, G. Zhang, A. Bose, and D. Curtice, “Operator Training Simulator: Algorithms andTestResults,”JEEETransactionsonPowerSystems,Vol. 4,No. 3, pp. 1154-1159,August 1989. 10. M. Prais, C. Johnson, A. Bose, and D. Curtice, “Operator Training Simulator: Component Models,” JEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 1160-1166,August 1989. AppendixD, Dynamic Analysis Methods 255 li. R. J. Frowd, J. C. Giri, and R. Podmore, “Transient Stability and Long-Term Dynamics Unified,” IEEE Transactions on PowerApparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-101, No. 10,pp. 3841-3849, October 1982. 12. EPRI Final Report EL-4610, Extended Transient-Midterm Stability Package: FinalReport, January 1987. 13. G. D. ByrneandA. C. Hindmarsh, “StiffODESolvers: AReview ofCurrent and ComingAttractions,”JournalofComputationalPhysics, Vol. 70,pp. 1-62, 1987. 14. M.

Stubbe, A. Bihain, J. Deuse, and J. C. Baader, “STAG - A New Unified Software Program forthe Study oftheDynamicBehaviour ofElectrical Power Systems, IEEE TransactionsonPowerSystems, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 129-138, Feb- ruary 1989. 15. J. Deuse and M. Stubbe, “Dynamic Simulation ofVoltage Collapses,” paper92 SM 396-2 PWRS, presentedatIEEE/PES SummerMeeting, July 12-16, 1992. 16. EPRI, User’s Manual—Extended Transient/Midterm Stability Program Pack- age(ETMSPVersion3.0), preparedbyOntarioHydro, June 1992. 17. P. Kundur, G.J. Rogers, D.Y. Wong, L.Wang, andM. G. Lauby,“AComprehen- sive Computer Program Package for Small Signal Stability Analysis ofPower Systems,”IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 5, No. 4, pp. 1076-1083, November 1990. Appendix E Equivalent System 2 Data This appendix provides complete steady state and data for Equivalent System 2 ofChapter 6 (Sections 6.3 and 6.4). Steady state data Figure E-1 shows the system with some ofthe main data. Gen 1 X=0.20n 1094 MW 5000 MVA 5000 MVAbase 500-kV. = Gens 3566MW 500-kV / 500-kKV 5000 MW (~) 1600 MVA —— | ia Industrial load a 1500 HH 3000 Mi, MW ——4ll 1800 MVAr (—~) |— [—— — J|] fetes i a 1500 MVAr 200km T Gen 2 15 Z= 0.03 +j0.1 on 2200 MVA 115-kV / 3300 MVAbase 868 3 LTC 3. Mvar “T~ LTC2 Residential and 300 T commercial load MVAr 3000 MW Sending area Loadarea Fig. E-1. Equivalent System 2.

Additional data (on a 100 MVAbase) are: 258 AppendixE, Equivalent System 2 Data ¢ Transformer LTC 1: 525/13.8-kV,X= 0.003 pu, 500-550 kV tap range, 533 kVbase case tap. ¢ Transformer LTC 2: 525/115-kV, X = 0.003 pu, 500-550 kV tap range, 530 kVbase case tap. ¢ Transformer LTC 3:115/13.8-kV, X = 0.001 pu, 103.5-126.5 kV tap range, 112.1 kVbase casetap. ¢ TransformerT4: 13.2/540-kV,X= 0.002 pu. ¢ TransformerT5: 13.2/540-kV, X= 0.0045 pu. ¢ TransformerT6: 13.2/530-kV,X= 0.00625 pu. * Gen 1: slack bus, V= 0.98 pu. * Gen 2: V = 0.964 pu, reactive power limits are -200 MVAr and 725 MVAr. * Gen 3: V = 0.972 pu, reactive power limits are -200 MVAr and 700 MVAr. ¢ 500-kVtransmission lines: Z= 0.0015 +j0.02880, B/2 = 1.173. ¢ Shunt capacitor reactive power on Figure E-1 are at nominal voltage. Figure E-2 shows base case voltages and some base case power flows. Gen 1 1094 -j4 5000 MVA 540 KV, — Gen 3 3566+jj625 548 kv 545kV 5000 -jj15 1600 MVA T6 14 13.8 kV 1500 +j17 O—H ute Gen x 200 km T 22002 LTC 3 MVA 116.4kV 112.1 KV 13.8 KV T — ice 3000 +j90 T Sending area Loadarea Fig. E-2. Equivalent System 2, base case conditions. Appendix E, Equivalent System2 Data 259 Dynamic data Generatorequivalents. Theelectrical characteristics ofthethree genera- tors are identical andcorrespond toa 0.95 power factor, 590-MVAcoal-fired unit. The generator data is based on Unit F18 in Appendix D ofAnderson and Fouad . The reference describes the generator, excitation system, and governor-turbine models. The generators havea static excitation sys- tem with power system stabilizer. The MVA ratings are given on Figures E-1 and E-2. Gen 1 is an equivalent for a large remote system, but is rela- tively small electrically (5000MVA) to provide only limited voltage support for the load area. The inertia constant, H, for Gen 2 and Gen 3 is 2.32 MW-s/MVA. The inertia constantofGen1 isverylarge, modeling the mechanical equivalent ofa large interconnection. Load equivalents.

The industrial load is 100% motor. Two equivalent motors are represented. A 3375 MVA motor consumes 2700 MW. Data corresponds to the large industrial motor of Table 4-1. A 500 MVA motor consumes 300MW. Data corresponds tothe small industrial motor ofTable 4-1. The 3000MWresidential and commercial load is halfresistive and half motor. The resistive load may be thermostatically controlled. The single motor equivalentis an aggregate ofmotors heavily dominated byaircondi- tioning load [2, page 3-21]. Motordata is: Table E-1 aA A ee A | 8 fe fee "ao | ose [ome [axe | aso [ane | ma | 0 | ae | References 1. P.M.Anderson andA.A. Fouad,PowerSystem Control andStability, The Iowa StateUniversityPress,Ames, Iowa, 1977. 2. General Electric Company, Load Modeling for Power Flow and Transient Stability Computer Studies, Volume 1: Summary Report, EPRI Final Report EL-5003, January 1987. Appendix F Voltage Instability Incidents In recent years, many voltage instability incidents have occurred around the world. There have also been some close calls, many ofwhich have not been widely reported. We will group known incidents by the time frames defined in Chapter 2—transient and longerterm. Table F-1 lists incidents resulting in collapse. Table F-2 lists incidents not resulting in collapse. Some of the incidents are complex and involve other phenomena besides pure voltage instability. We describe the inci- dents briefly, first for the Table F-1 list and then forthe Table F-2 list. The references listed in the tables provide further description. Manyofthe best known incidents are described in detail (with plots) in an IEEE Working Group report . Nelson River HVDC system, Winnipeg, Canada, April 13, 1986. Par- tial voltage collapse occurred during energization of a converter trans- former. Inrush current depressed ac voltage, resulting in commutation failures and inverter firing angle advance. Voltage collapsed to 57% and then recovered after temporary de blocking.

A second voltage collapse followed. Tie line tripping, shutdown ofthree offour de poles, and under- voltage load shedding resulted. Acontrol (System Undervoltage Protection) which reducesde powerbya fixed amount forlow ac voltage was out ofser- vice. SE Brazil, Paraguay, November 30, 1986. After several ac system outages, the Sao Roque inverter (Itaipu HVDC link) ac voltage dropped to 0.85 pu for several seconds. Repetitive commutation failures occurred, and dc power control increased de current which increased converter reactive consumption. A complete de system shutdown and an ac system breakup resulted. Over 1200 MW ofload was shed. This and other disturbances led to a number ofde control changes. South Florida, May 17, 1985. A brush fire caused three lightly-loaded 500-kVlines totrip, resulting involtage collapse and blackout within afew 262 AppendixF, Voltage Instability Incidents seconds. Low voltage prevented underfrequency relays from operating. Transient stability simulation indicated the system should have recovered and load modeling deficiencies (including modeling ofpower plant auxilia- ries) are suspected. Load loss was 4,292 MW. Figure 2-3 shows voltage and frequency plots. Table F-1, Incidents with Collapse 13April 1986|Winnipeg, Canada Transient, 1 sec. Nelson River HVDC link 30Nov. 1986|SE Brazil, Paraguay Transient, 2 sec. Itaipu HVDC link 17 May 1985|South Florida, USA 1,6 22Aug. 1987 |Western Tennessee, USA| Transient, 10 sec. 27 Dec. 1983 |Sweden Longerterm, 55 sec. 1,10,11 2 Sept. 1982|Florida, USA Longerterm, 1-3 min. | 12,13 26 Nov. 1982 |Florida, USA Longer term, 1-3 min. 28 Dec. 1982|Florida, USA Longerterm, 1-3 min. | 1,12,13 30 Dec. 1982|Florida, USA Longerterm, 1-3 min. | 12,13 22 Sept. 1977|Jacksonville, Florida Longerterm, few min. 12 Jan. 1987 Longer term, 6-7 min. 23 July 1987 |Tokyo, Japan Longer term, 20 min. 19 Dec. 1978 |France Longer term, 26 min. 1,19,20 22Aug. 1970 |Japan Longer term, 30 min.

Western Tennessee, August 22, 1987. A 78-cycle, phase-to-phase arcing 115-kV bus fault in Memphis, Tennessee resulted in 161-kV and 500-kV system voltages between 75% and82% ofnormal forapproximately 10 sec- Appendix F,Voltage Instability Incidents 263 onds following fault clearing. Motor load reactive requirements prolonged the voltage depression. Zone 3 relays operated and cascading resulted. Loadloss was 1265 MW. Sweden, December27, 1983. Adisconnector failure and fault at a substa- tion west of Stockholm resulted in loss of the substation and two 400-kV lines. Approximately 8 seconds later, a 220-kV line tripped on overload. On-load tap changer actions caused lower transmission voltages and higher currents on remaining north to south lines. Approximately 50 sec- onds after the fault, another 400-kV line tripped. Cascading and islanding ofsouthern Sweden followed. Frequency and voltage collapsed and under- frequency load shedding did not save the system. Nuclear units in the islanded system tripped by overcurrent or underimpedance protection resulting in a blackout. Load loss was about 11,400 MW. Florida, 1982. All four disturbances were similar and were initiated by loss ofa largegenerator unit in central or southern Florida. Because ofthe increased imports, voltages deteriorated andseparations occurred after one to three minutes. The islandings were followed by underfrequency load shedding ofabout 2000 MW. These disturbances led to implementation of shunt reactor and shunt capacitor bank switching by voltage relays at several 230-kVsubstations. Jacksonville, Florida, September22, 1977. Aseries ofvoltage collapses occurred. The collapses involved unit trips, field current limiting, manual load shedding, and other phenomena. Belgium, August 4, 1982. The initial disturbance was disconnection ofa 700 MW unit during commissioning tests. After 45 seconds, automatic control action reduced reactive power on two other units.

Three to four minutes after the initial event, three units were tripped by “max MVAr protection.A”t3 minutes, 20 seconds, voltage was 0.82 pu ata majorgener- ating station. At 4 minutes, 30 seconds, two additional generators tripped by impedance relays, resultingincollapse. Western France, January 12, 1987. Over a period ofabout fifty minutes, four units at the Cordemais thermal plant tripped. Voltages decayed and nine other thermal units tripped over the next seven minutes; eight units because offield current protection defects. The total power deficiency was around 9000 MW. Voltages then stabilized at very low levels (0.5-0.8 per unit). After about six minutes ofvoltage collapse, 400/225-kV transformers were tripped to shed about 1500 MWofload. Voltages then recovered. The fact that voltages stabilized at low levels rather than completely collapsed isvery interesting. The incident occurred in wintertimewhen the 264 Appendix F, Voltage Instability Incidents i :Tripping of 420 ni, :Chinon 3 430800f : QS| (FrZ 360 ! WN i = Lf a > 340 : , x::N © 330200 :: D\eBarnaebos ) } 5 280 H \ Avoine > :Tripping of 260 ‘Cordemais 4 Menuel 240 220 Cordemais | 200 ! Load shedding 180 : 160 1th 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 12h Time - minutes starting at 1139 hours Fig. F-1. Western France voltage collapse on 12 January 1987. Voltage recordings on 400-kV system. loads were quite voltage sensitive. Some motor load no doubt dropped off line sothat the remaining load was even morevoltage sensitive. Duringthe low voltage period, adding more load (perhaps by thermostatic control) would probably have resulted in less load power—equivalent to being on thebottom side ofaP-Vcurve. Figure F-1 shows the voltage profiles. Tokyo, July 23, 1987. Weather was very hot and loads were abnormally high. After the noon hour, loads increased at 400 MW/minute.

Despite con- nection ofall available shunt capacitors, the voltage decayed, with voltages on the 500-kVsystem at460 kVat 1315hours and at370 kVat 1319hours. Collapse began at 1319 hours; 8,168 MW were interrupted. Unfavorable characteristics ofnew type of air conditioners were thought to be part of the problem. France, December 19, 1978. France was importing power from other countries. Load rise between 0700 and 0800 hours was 4,600 MW, com- pared to 3,000 MW the previous days. Voltage deteriorated after 0800 hours and between 0805 and 0810 some EHV/HV tap changers were blocked. Low voltages reduced some thermal production. At 0820, voltages on the eastern 400-kV system ranged from 342 kV to 374 kV. Cascading AppendixF,Voltage Instability Incidents 265 began at 0826 after an overload relay tripped a major 400-kV line (system operators had an alarm that the line would trip with 20 minutes time delay). During restoration another collapse occurred. System restoration was completed by 1230. Load interrupted was 29 GW and 100 GWh. The costofthe outage was estimated at $200-300 million. Table F-2, Incidentswithout Collapse 17, 20, 21 Miles City, Montana, Transient, 1-2 sec. May 1986 USAHVDC link 11, 30, 31 Mississippi, USA Transient, 1-2 sec. July 1987 TH July 1989 [South Carolina, USA [Unknown «(2A 21 May 1983|Northern California, Longer term, 2 minutes| 1,25 USA 10Aug. 1981 |Longview, Wash., USA 26,27 17 Sept. 1981| Central Oregon, USA [Longer term, minutes |28 | 20 May 1986 | England 29,30 2 Mar. 1979|Zealand, Denmark Longer term, 15 min. 30 | 22 Sept. 1970|NewYork state, USA Longerterm, minutes, insecure for hours 20 July 1987| Illinois and Indiana, Longerterm, insecure | 33,34, USA for hours 35,36 11 June 1984|Northeast USA Longer term, insecure |37 forhours 5July 1990|Baltimore, Washington |Longer term, insecure |38 D.C., USA forhours Miles City HVDC link, May and July 1986.

As a result of weak ac systems, large voltage deviations occurred during de ramping and during 266 AppendixF,Voltage Instability Incidents reactive switching resulting in commutation failures, and in some cases, converter tripping and lossof a 310 MWwest-sidegenerator. Mississippi, July 1987. In 1981, undervoltage load shedding was installed in a load area where loss ofa 500/161-kV transformer source may cause voltage collapse. Air conditioning load comprises a large portion of summer peak load. On three separate days in July 1987, current trans- former failures caused transformer bank outage and other outages. Volt- ages collapsed immediately, but undervoltage load shedding operating withintwo seconds to shedupto400 MWofload, resultinginsystem recov- ery. On July 22, 1992, loss ofthe 500/161-kV transformer resulted in 586 MW ofundervoltage load shedding. South Carolina, July 11, 1989. Anuclear plant generating 868 MW and 440 MVaAr tripped during record power demand. Due to automatic voltage regulator action, nine hydro units generating a total of 649 MW then tripped by generator backup relays. The 115-kV transmission voltage dropped to about 89% and the 230-kVvoltage dropped to about 93%. Northern California, May 21, 1983. Following a Pacific HVDC Intertie bipolar outage (1286 MW), voltages along Pacific 500-kV AC Intertie decayed for two minutes. The lowest voltage was 385-kV at Vaca-Dixon 500-kV substation (73% ofthe 525 kV normal operating voltage). The low voltage caused tripping ofpumps at various aqueduct stations, leading to recovery. The initial Pacific AC Intertie loading was 2240 MW. Longview, Washington area, August 10, 1981. Temperature was very hot (41°C). The Allston 500/230-kV autotransformer near the Trojan nuclear plant wasoutformaintenance. The 1100MWTrojan plant tripped, removing power and voltage support to the Longview area.

Transmission lines (230-kV and 115-kV) were overloaded and a number ofsingle line to ground faults occurred, probably because ofsagginginto trees (saggingdue to temperature, and current overload due to high load and low voltage). TheLongview aluminum reductionplant 13.8-kVvoltage droppedaslowas 12.4 kV and Bonneville Power Administration operators permitted plant operators to operate tap changers on 230/13.8-kV transformers —this was the wrong thing to do—the voltage rose to 13.2 kV, butthen dropped again below 13 kV. Shortly thereafter a potline relayed off. At one point 230-kV system voltage was down to 208 kV and voltage collapse ofthe Longview area was imminent. Forty-six minutes after the Trojan outage, operators tripped 110 MW ofpotline load. Lines were then reclosed and the Allston transformer was restored to service. AppendixF, Voltage Instability Incidents 267 Central Oregon, September 17, 1981. The 51 MVAr, 230-kV capacitor bank atLaPineSubstation began hunting (cycling) following openingofthe 230-kV line serving the Bend, Oregon load area from the north. With only the 230-kVline from the south in service, the capacitor bank induction disc voltage relay settings were such that the capacitor bank switched nineteen times in about one hour—at about three minute intervals. The voltage extremes were about 219 and 251 kV. Figure F-2 shows substation voltage. It appears that tap changer regulation ofload contributed to the hunting. Following capacitor bank energization voltage increased for about three minutes until bank deenergization; with the bank off, voltage decayed until the bank energization. a a _ ae Ar AA V ied A EE WL | 6 1 LA 1000 0900 0800 —_ Time - 20 minutes/division Fig. F-2. Shunt capacitor bank hunting at LaPine Substation near Bend Oregon on September 17, 1981. England, May20, 1986. During a thunderstorm, six 400-kV circuits were lost within one minute.

Voltage decayed progressively over a five minute period, with 352 kV recorded at the lowest point. Within 5 minutes, 1000 MWofgasturbines werebrought on linetostabilize voltages. Circuit reclo- sure then restored voltage. Predictions were that voltage collapse should have occurred—speculation is that interaction oftap changers with differ- ent timer settings slowed the voltage decay, allowing time for operator action. Zealand, Denmark, March 2, 1979, The initiating event was tripping of a 270 MW unit in the southern part ofthe island. There were no nearby 268 Appendix F, Voltage Instability Incidents reactive power reserves and voltage decayed due to load restoration by tap changing.Afterfifteen minutes thevoltage wasbelow 0.75 perunit making it impossible to start and synchronize a 70 MW gas turbine in the area. Load was then shed manually to restore voltage and allow gas turbine synchronization. The long time for voltage decay (fifteen minutes) was due to relatively long fixed time delay between tap steps. Western France, February 3, 1990 and November 1990. Measures taken by Electricité de France since the January 12, 1987 incident (Table F-1) contained two very severe disturbances. A violent storm on February 3, 1990 caused loss of the 225-kV and 400-kV buses at the Cordemais gen- erating station. Automatic tap changer blocking and operator network unloading stabilized the power system until repairs were made. In November 1990, four Cordemais generating units were lost within forty minutes. Operator actions, including blocking oftap changers before automatic blockingcriteria was reached, again stabilized the system. NewYork state, September22, 1970. Several voltage decays were experi- enced over a period of several hours. Operators implemented voluntary reductions, public appeals, and voltage reductions. At 1545, voltage at a 345-kV bus was 318 kV—when voltage fell another 6 kV, operators shed about 200 MWofload. Illinois and Indiana, July 20, 1987.

Loads were at near-record levels, reactive demand was higherthan expected, power transfers were high, and many generators were unavailable. Voltages were as much as 8% below normal at 765-kV, 11% at 345-kV, and 12% at 138-kV. As a result, AEP added 138-kV mechanically switched capacitors and put switches on 765-kV shunt reactors. Studies indicated that the system could have sur- vived a credible single contingency. Northeast United States, June 11, 1984. Cause was combination of abnormally high loads, planned outages, and forced outages. Despite volt- age reductions and use of available shunt capacitors, the west-to-east transfers in the Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland Interconnection (PJM) and the New York Power Pool imports from Canada had to be reduced to keep within voltage and reactive precontingency limits. PJM reduced generation on several units to increase reactive power output; replacement power was purchased from gas turbine generators inVirginia. Baltimore and Washington D.C., July 5, 1990. High loads (high temperatures) and generation outages resulted in low 500-kVvoltages. Appendix F, VoltageInstability Incidents 269 Voltage reductions (5%), running out-of merit generation, demand-side management, and rotatingblackouts (400MW) were required. References 1. IEEE Committee Report, VoltageStabilityofPowerSystems:Concepts, Analyti- cal Tools, andIndustry Experience, IEEE publication 90TH0358-2-PWR. 2. J. Chand and D. Tang, “Operational Experience ofthe Nelson River HVDC System,”ProceedingsofSecondHVDCSystem OperatingConference, pp. 21-31, Winnipeg, Canada, 18-21 September 1989. 3. M. M. Rashwan, G. B. Mazur, M.A. Weekes, and D. P. Brandt, “AC/DC System Power/Voltage Stability EnhancementUsingModified PowerControl,”Proceed- ingsofSecondHVDCSystem OperatingConference, pp. 35-39, Winnipeg, Can- ada, 18-21 September 1989. 4, IEEE Committee Report, “HVDC Controls for System Dynamic Performance,” IEEETransactions on Power Systems, Vol. 6,pp. 743-752, May 1991. 5.

H. Arakaki, J. C. Lopes, and A. A. S. Praca, “Itaipu HVDC Transmission System—Analysis of Control System and Protection Performance after Two Years ofOperation,” paper SP-25, Proceedings ofIstSymposium ofSpecialists inElectric Operational Planning, RiodeJaneiro, August 17-21, 1987. 6. D. McInnis, “South Florida Blackout,” unpublished Florida Power & Light report. 7. NorthAmerican Electric Reliability Council, 1987 System Disturbances, p. 19, July 1988. 8. G. C. Bullock, “Cascading Voltage Collapse in West Tennessee, August 22, 1987,”Georgia InstituteofTechnology 44th AnnualProtective Relaying Confer- ence, May2-4, 1990. : 9. G. C. Bullock, “Cascading Voltage Collapse in West Tennessee, August 22, 1987,” WesternProtectiveRelayingConference, October 1990. 10. CIGRE Working Group38.01,“PlanningAgainstVoltage Collapse,”Electra, pp. 55-75, March 1987. 11. J. F. Christensen, Study Group 38 discussion, CIGRE, Proceedings of 33rd Session, Vol. II, 1988. 12. North American Electric Reliability Council, Review ofSelected Major Bulk PowerSystemDisturbances inNorthAmerica—1982. 13. IEEE Committee Report, “VAR Management—Problem Recognition and Con- trol,”IEEETransactions onPowerApparatusandSystems,Vol. PAS-103, No. 8, pp. 2108-2116,August 1984. 14. W. R. LachsandD. Sutanto, “Different Types ofVoltage Instability,” IEEE/PES paper 93SM518-1 PWRS. 15. A.J. CalvaerandE.VanGeert, “Quasi Steady State Synchronous Machine Lin- earizationAround an Operating Point andApplication,” JEEE Transactions on PowerApparatusandSystems, Vol. PAS-103, No. 6, pp. 1466-1479, June 1984. 16. Y. Harmand, M. Trotignon, J. F. Lesigne, J. M. Tesseron, C. Lemaitre, and F. Bourgin, “Analysis of a Voltage Collapse Incident and Proposal for a Time-BasedHierarchical Containment Scheme,” CIGRE, paper38/39-02, 1990. 17. C.

Barbier and J-P Barret, “Analysis ofPhenomena ofVoltage Collapse on a Transmission System,” Revue Generale de Uelectricite, Vol. 89, pp. 672-690, October 1980. 270 AppendixF, Voltage Instability Incidents 18. A. Kurita and T. Sakurai, “The Power System Failure on July 23, 1987 in Tokyo,” Proceedings ofthe 27th Conference on Decision and Control, Austin, Texas, December 1988. 19. A. Cheimanoff and C. Curroyer, “The Power Failure of December 19, 1978,” RevueGenerale del’electricite, Vol. 89,pp. 280-320,April 1980. 20. J. A. Casazza, Interim Report on the French Blackout ofDecember 19, 1978, DOEreport,February8, 1979. 21. T. Nagao, “Voltage Collapse at Load Ends ofPower Systems,” Electrical Engi- neeringinJapan,Vol.95,No.4, 1975. 22. R. D. Doherty, R. K. Johnson, S. F. Schweitzer, and T. L. Weaver, “Miles City Station—Early Operating Experience,” CIGRE, Proceedings of32nd Session, Vol. I, paper 14-03, 1986. 23. Hca.tiMo.nShuhandJ. R. Cowan, “Undervoltage Load SheddinAgn UltimateAppli- forVoltage Collapse,” Georgia Institute ofTechnology 46th Annual Pro- tectiveRelayingConference,April 29-May 1, 1992. 24. NorthAmerican Electric Reliability Council, 1989System Disturbances, p. 18, July 1990. 25. R. H. Vierra, “Reactive Power and Voltage Control in Western Systems,” pre- sented atIEEE/PESsummer meeting, VancouverJuly 16, 1985. 26. T. R. Reitman, “Longview Disturbance—August 10, 1981,” BPAmemorandum, August 27, 1981. 27. D. Mann, “BPARequested Power Curtailment,” ReynoldsAluminummemoran- dum,August 21, 1981. 28. R. Demaris,“LaPineSubstation CapacitorCycling,”Bonneville PowerAdminis- tration memorandum, 22January 1982. 29. M. G. Dwek, Study Group 38 discussion, CIGRE, Proceedings of33rd Session, Vol. II, 1988.CIGRE TF 38-02-10, Modelling of Voltage Collapse Including DynamicPhenomena, 1992. 30. CIGRETF38-02-10,ModellingofVoltage CollapseIncludingDynamicPhenom- ena, 1993. 31. B. Heilbronnand G.

Testud, StudyGroup 38discussion, CIGRE, Proceedings of the 1992 Session (inFrench). 32. General Electric Company, Long-Term Power System Dynamics, Phase III, EPRIFinal ReportEL-983,May 1982. 33. NorthAmerican Electric Reliability Council, 1987 System Disturbances, p. 18, July 1988. 34. P. B. Johnson, S. L. Ridenbaugh, R. D. Bednarz, and K. G. Henry, “Maximizing theReactive CapabilityofAEPGeneratingUnits,”ProceedingsoftheAmerican PowerConference,Vol. 52, pp. 373-377, 1990. 35. M. Ea. Rahman and M. D. Higgins, “Reactive Power Planning and its Impact—An Actual Case History,” Proceedings oftheAmerican Power Confer- ence,Vol. 53,pp. 907-911, 1991. 36. J. A. Pinnello, “Planning Perspectives ofVoltage Control,” Proceedings: Bulk Power System Voltage Phenomena—Voltage Stability and Security, EPRI EL-6183, pp. 3-57-3-60, January 1989. 37. NorthAmericanElectric Reliability Council, 1984SystemDisturbances, p. 24. 38. North American Electric Reliability Council, 1990 System Disturbances, p. 33-36, May 1991. Index A 171, 253 ‘AGC power flow 124 EUROSTAGcomputer program 253 Anderson, Paul M. 123, 259 F Area ControlError(ACE) 132 Flatabg, Nils220 arlee 3 220. Florida Power and Light Company 212, Artificiafla,intJ.elligence 219, 220 Fouad, on 123, 259 AutomaticGenerationControl(AGC)2, 123, 129-135,246, 252 G Automaticlinereclosing213 Gao,Baofu236 B Gas turbines 208, 210 ; Generator Baldwin,M. S. 119 automatic voltageregulators 117 Balu 204 backupprotection 121 Balu,N.J. 204 capability curves ??-110, 115 Barbier, C. 28 field current limiting (see alsoover- Barret,J.-P.28 excitation limiter) Belgiumnational control center 220 high-side voltagecontrol 118 Bonnevillepower Senos 104, line dropcompensation 118, 209 British Columbia Hydro 159, 206 maximum excitation limiter (see Cc overexcitation limiter 119-121 Cables 47 overloadcapabilities 116 Calvaer,A. 115 reactive powercapability 109-116 Carpentier, J.

L. 240 Vcurves 110 | Constantenergyloads23, 24,36,89-91 Generatorcapabilitycurves 109-113 Criticalvoltage 28 Generatorfieldcurrentlimiting21, 252 D GeneratorQ-Vcurves 113 Debs, Gezhouba-Shanghai HVDC link 190 ASs. 229 ‘on 217 Governor power flow 123, 245, 246, 253 istribution automation Distribution voltageregulators 22 H Dommel, H. W. 229 Hammad,A. E. 197 Dynamic analysis methods 251-254 Highvoltage directcurrent 12 E Hungry Horse power plant 127 HVDClinks 181-200 Effective short circuit ratio 14, 192 dynamic performance comparison ElectricPower Research Institute70, with AClinks 199 72, 76, 81, 96, 128, 150, 154, equations 183-187 161, 171, 221, 236, 252 invertercontrol 189-191 ElectricitédeFrance219 powerinstability 195 Energy ManagementSystems (EMS) steadystatecharacteristicsdiagram 218-220 189 ETMSPcomputerprogram96, 154, tap changer instability 196 272 = Index Voltage Stability Factor 197-199 Pacific HVDC Intertie 194 HVDC transmission 215 Pacific Intertiesystem 124 I Pacific Intertiesystem 52 Indices Perunit system 225-227 . ofvoltage stabi-lity220, 241 Pereira,MarioV. F. 204 Induction motors22, 23, 143, 209 Philadelphia Electric Company221 Integrated Services Digital Networks Phoenix-Mead-AdelantoHVDC link (ISDN) 217 200 Intermountain Power Project HVDC Power angle 5 Itaipu link 199 Power angle curve 5 . HVDClink 188,261 Powercirclediagrams 8 K Power flow program 2, 229-242 Kiihn, W. 197 busornode types 231 Kundur, Prabha 2, 119, 236 centinuation method 240 L divergenceproblems 33 fastdecoupled methods7, 239-240 Lachs, Walter 111, 220, 252 modalanalysis 236 Loadcharacteristics 35-38, 67-105 Newton-Raphson method 231-236, Load diversity 90 239 Loadrejection 11 sensitivity analysis 150, 207, 235, Loadtesting 241 in Puget Sound area 163 Power losses PortAngeles 104 reactive 10 Loadability curve 43 realoractive 10 LOADSYN computer program 72-77, Power plant response 127-129 161 gasturbines 128 M hydro 127 Manitoba thermal 128 .

Hydro 118 Power system operation 218-221 McFadden, D. P.119 . Power transmission Mechanically switched capacitors active 3-6 (MSCs), seeShuntcapacitor maximum 28 Miller, banks reactive 6-9 Modal T. J. E. 46, 48,54 Protective relaying214 analysis 207 Public Service CompanyofColorado 210 Morison, Kip236 Puget Sound area 127, 159-179, 217 N P-Vcurves 27, 149, 196,207,219, 240, National Grid Company 219 246, 249 Nelson River HVDC link63, 188, 261 Q Nodaladmittance matrix 229 i: North American Electric Reliability OyeHVDC link 190 Council (NERC) 123 Oo R Ontario Reactive power compensation 41, 42 OptimalHydro 216 Region ofattraction 24 Ostrup, power flow 212, 219 Reliability criteria 203-208 Pp TorbenK. 113 deterministic 166, 204 Puget Sound area voltage stability PacificAC Intertie50 205 ce 273 Index value-based 166, 204 chargingreactive power44 voltagestability margins 205-207 inductive reactance 43 Rotor angle stability 24 parameters43-45 Rudenberg, R. 123 series resistance43 s theory45 Seattle City Light 162 U Series capacitors 48-51, 211 Undervoltageload shedding 216 compared with shunt compensa- UniversityofLiége219 Shon tion 59-61 Vv . ort astribution systems 94 Van Cutsem, T. 220, 240, 248, 253 circuit capacity 11, 13 Shortcircuitratio 14, 192 Van deMeulebroeke, F. 117 Shuntcapacitor banks 26,38,51-53, __Vltagecollapse 17, 26,53 113, 144, 212, 215 definition 18 compared with series compensa- HVDClinks 191 0 tion59-61 VoltageCollapseProximityIndicator30, Shuntreactors48, 53, 212 150, 241 Solar magnetic disturbances 221 Voltage control area 33, 207,241 Stability 17 Voltagedependent currentorderlimiter Starr, E.

C. 61 188, 192 State estimation 218 se nature power systems 26 Staticvercompensators 52,53-59, 145, incidentsof261-269 in distributionsystems 93 time frames 19 Static varsystems, see Static varcom- Voltage reduction 216, 218 pensators Voltageregulation Subsynchronous resonance 51, 60 ULTC blocking 215 ; Surge impedanceloading42,48, 210 ULTC effect on shunt capacitor Susceptance regulator(SVC) 56 banks 215 Synchronous condenser61, 145 Voltage security 19,219 Synchronous stability, see rotor angle V°ltage stability stability longer-term 21-22 System characteristic 16,35 mechanisms on 119 System engineering 3 Voltage stability definitions 18 T Voltage Stability Factor 197 Temporary overvoltage 11 Voltage stability solutions Tennessee ValleyAuthority 217 distributionsystems 215-218 Thermostatically-controlled loads, see generation system208-210 constantenergyloads transmission system 210-215 TokyoElectricPowerCompany 118, V-Qcurves 31-34, 139-142, 150-154, 212, 219 167-169, 207,246,248 Transformers VSTAB computerprogram 150, 236, 239 Under-load tapchanging35 under-load tapchanging22, 63 Transient stability 183, 204, 213, 252 Transient stability program 2 Transmissionlines41-47 bundled conductors 44 ABOUT THE AUTHOR Carson W.TaylorisPrincipal Engineer with theBonneville . Power Administration in Portland, Oregon. His areasof expertise atBPAinclude powersystem control and protection, system dynamicperformance, ac/de power systeminteraction, andpowersystem planning. In 1986, he established CarsonTaylorSeminars, acompany specializingin electric powersystem education. Mr.Taylor isaFellowoftheIEEE,andtheauthororcoauthorofmany IEEE andCIGRE papers.

